# The Uses and Abuses of History: A British Historian’s View of Indonesia

 Inaugural lecture

Adjunct Professor at the Faculty of Humanities of the University of Indonesia (FIB-UI)

Monday, 1 December 2014

10 o’clock

> ‘Zaman-zamannya agung, tetapi masa agung hanya dihuni orang-orang kerdil’ (Eine große Epoche hat das Jahrhundert geboren; Aber der große Moment findet ein kleines Geschiecht, ein Deutsches Lusispi’el’ (Johann Christiaan Friederich Schiller, 1759-1805, Sämmtliche Werken , vol.9, p.261)

Honourable Dean of the Faculty of Humanities, Dr Adrianus Wawarontu, Pak Hashim Djojohadikusumo, ladies and gentlemen, friends and colleagues! We are gathered together on this Monday morning, 1 December, for a most fortunate occasion which has been made possible by the unstinting generosity of Pak Hashim and his educational trust, the Yayasan Arsari Djojohadikusumo. As many of you will know, this has been active for more than twenty years in the support of the development of tertiary education through the provision of state-of the-art facilities, and the continuation of the aims of Indonesia’s founders for the preservation of our country’s environmental and cultural heritage for the benefit of future Indonesian generations.

[YAD merupakan kegiatan sosial keluarga Hashim Djojohadikusumo – lebih dari 20 tahun lalu dengan misi membangun pendidikan bangsa melalui peningkatan sarana dan prasarana yang berkualitas, serta meneruskan cita-cita panduhulu bangsa dengan melestarikan budaya dan lingkungan untuk diteruskan kepada generasi mendatang]

Earlier this year, many of us were gathered in the adjacent Faculty of Economics for the inauguration of the Sumitro Djojohadikusumo Library, named after Pak Hashim’s distinguished father, one of post-independence Indonesia’s foremost economists and perintis (founding father) of the UI Economics Faculty, who did so much for the development of his profession as an academic discipline in the Republic.

Sadly, I never had the opportunity to meet with Pak Sumitro, but I was blessed to have had contact with Pak Hashim’s grandfather, Raden Mas Margono Djojohadikusumo, founder of the Bank Negara Indonesia (BNI), whose personal passion was history and whose own vivid memoir written in impeccable Dutch – Herinneringen uit drie tijdperken [Kenang-kenangan dari tiga zaman] –brings alive the history of his remarkable family and Indonesia’s own national awakening from the Ethical period (1901-1920s) and the foundation of Boedi Oetomo (20 May 1908).

Pak Margono’s particular interest was in the history of the Java War (1825-1830) and the figure of Pangeran Diponegoro (1785-1855), in whose five-year struggle (perjuangan ) two prominent members of his family were involved – Tumenggung Banyakwidé (RT Kertonegoro IV of Banyumas aka RT Mangunyudo Mukti), one of Diponegoro’s most loyal junior commanders who was exiled to Ternate after the war; and Raden Mas Joyoprono (post-1832, Raden Tumenggung Joyodiningrat, bupati of Karanganyar, 1832-64), the first pribumi historian of the Java War who authored the Schetsen over den Oorlog van Java (1856-7) edited by the Dutch amateur historian, Jan Hageman (1817-71).

After spending nearly all my adult life as a professional historian in my alma mater, Oxford University, where I was Fellow and Tutor in Modern History at my old college, Trinity (1979-2008), it was frankly a challenge to leave the comforts of Oxon for Jakarta. I remembered Gus Dur’s comment during a brief meeting with him in Oxford in 1993 that the Indonesian capital was a ‘warehouse of money’ – a commercial and political capital whose essential lubrication was cash. So here I was leaving Oxford a ‘warehouse of books’ and my own quiet home in Co. Clare in the Republic of Ireland – ‘a warehouse of cattle’ – for this great wen – more Dickens London – warts and all - than a sleek modern city where the power of money was king. And what did I find? Again like Dickens in his Tale of Two Cities, I found ‘the best of times and the worst of times’. The ‘worst of times’ I leave to your imagination but it had much to do with my four years (2008-12) attached to the Ministry of Health, an institution like Kafka’s Castle in its mind-bending protocols. But I also recall a remark by our Cambodia Trust CEO at the time that all I had been given were ‘opportunities’.

Frankly, it did not seem that way at the time as my days dancing to the bureaucratic tune were more frustration than opportunity. But once I had left that bizarre world in which I was a stranger and returned to my first love history, the land of ‘opportunities’ really began to open. The impresario here was Pak Hashim and his Yayasan: without their support the possibility of returning to the teaching and writing world would not have been a starter. Our first joint venture was perhaps the most ambitious: namely the translation and publication of my magnum opus on Diponegoro and the Java War – The Power of Prophecy; The End of an Old Order in Java, 1785-1855 (Kuasa Ramalan; Pangeran Diponegoro dan Akhir Tatanan Lama di Jawa 1785-1855), into Bahasa and its publication by the Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia (KPG), whose long-suffering editors, Pak Candra Gautama and Bu Christina M. Udiani, will always remain in my heart. The 8 March 2012 launch of this book in Diponegoro’s former Yogya residence Tegalrejo, turned into an historic event, a gathering together of the ‘balung terpisah ’ (scattered bones) of the Diponegoro family with nearly a hundred relatives of the fighting prince meeting each other for the first time in 187 years in their ancestral home.

This led eventually to an invitation from one of the speakers at a subsequent book launch in the National Library (PerpusNas) in Jakarta (12 April 2012) to consider an attachment to the FIB-UI as an Adjunct Professor, the post for which I am making my inaugural lecture today. This would not have been possible to take up without the Yayasan Arsari Djojohadikusumo’s support. Since that time, exactly a year after the PerpusNas launch, in early April 2013 to be precise, I began my supervisions of doctoral students, many of whom I found as motivated and as capable as those it had been my privilege to supervise during nearly three decades at Oxford.

Other opportunities also opened up: after years of putting things off, I was able to take up once again a book project originally suggested by the Oxford publisher, Peter Lang, which involved distilling my Power of Prophecy into a more readable 100,000-word text. Eventually published as Destiny; The Life of Prince Diponegoro of Yogyakarta, 1785-1855 , YAD’s support enabled KPG’s senior partner, Penerbit Buku Kompas, to make a translation and bring out a handsomely subsidised Indonesian-language translation, Takdir; Riwayat Pangeran Diponegoro, 1785-1855 , on 8 March 2014. This was the same day as the third of Mas Landung Simatupang’s dramatic performances (pementasan dramatik / tuturan ), again partly sponsored by YAD, which were based on the prince’s UNESCO-recognised (Memory of the World) autobiography, Babad Diponegoro , composed in Manado (1831-32) during the first years of his Sulawesi exile (1830-55).

Reviewing these developments, it seems that a door had suddenly opened in my life. A long gestation below the winter ground of Northwestern Europe had blossomed into life in the equatorial luxuriance of the tanah-air, that ‘beautiful kingdom of Insulinde which coils the equator like a girdle of emeralds’ [‘van ’t prachtig rijk van Insulinde dat zich daar slingert om den evenaar als een gordel van smaragd’]. For me the doorkeeper who made this possible was the YAD and we are here today to honour their jasa (merit).

So what does this door open onto? Today, it is my task to warn, to exhort and to encourage in terms of the craft of the historian. What use is history in this age of Reformasi? Everything! Consider this: one recent estimation suggests that those residing outside Indonesia (both non-resident Indonesians and foreigners) account for ninety percent of all scholarly articles published on Indonesia overseas may serve as a wake-up here.[^1] If true, this makes Indonesia one of the countries least effective in explaining itself to the outside world. Such a situation cannot bode well for the Republic. Even if the McKinsey Global Institute’s September 2012 economic forecast that Indonesia will move from sixteenth to seventh largest economy in the world by 2030 proves correct,[^2] it will be a ship without a compass.

In this context, the words of Indonesia’s founding president, Sukarno (1901–70; in office, 1945–67) in his last 17 August 1966 independence day speech, ‘Do not ever, even for a moment, turn your back on your history’ (Jangan sekali-kali meninggalkan sejarah ), ring truer than ever. Without a love and appreciation of their own history, Indonesia will be a rootless nation, its citizens condemned to live forever on the margins of a globalizing world without a true sense of who they are or where they are going. It is the younger generation’s task to see that this does not happen. And it is for the older generation, now in leadership positions, to provide the resources to ensure that history has an honoured place in the life of the nation. In the present era of reform and national renewal, a truly civilized Indonesia demands no less.

But this is not just about national pride, it is about national survival. In the bitter aftermath of World War II, Germany rebuilt itself by reconnecting with its deeper past, confronting the demons of the Third Reich (1933-45) and Hitler’s genocide by using the example of an older and less imperial Germany to rebuild a new democratic Federal Republic (Bundesrepublik ). Today its success is plain for all to see: it has used the lessons of its history to move on. The dark valley of the German Sonderweg (Special Path) has been set aside and it is now become one of the world’s most effective democracies, a model for other countries with its federalism and decentralisation, 75 percent use of recycled energy, and constitutionally mandated study of its Nazi past.

In a very different context, South Korea has also reconnected with its past to overcome the trauma of its civil war (Korean War, 1950-53) which left it at the time of the 27 July 1953 Pamunjom armistice far more devastated and poorer than recently independent Indonesia. With great determination and fortitude, it rebuilt itself under the autocratic Park Chung-hee regime (1961-79), and is now the world’s ninth largest economy, renowned the world over for the successful export of its culture, its girl and boy bands forming part of a globally recognised ‘Korean Wave’. But make no mistake, they too are not just froth on a media-induced tide but also part of Korea’s harnessing of much older traditions to support its post-war economic miracle.

And what about Indonesia? What role does history in its struggle for national identity and survival? If one looks back to the generation which fought and won Indonesia’s independence, the record is impressive. This was a cohort which had a highly developed sense of its own history – both invented and real.

This was most vividly illustrated in August 1947, when Sutan Sjahrir (1909-1966), the former Indonesian prime minister and foreign minister (1945-47), travelled to the US to address the UN Security Council at Lake Success on Long Island. The situation for the young and embattled Yogyakarta-based Republic was dire: the Dutch had just launched their First Police Action (Operation Product, July 1947) and had taken back most of their former colony’s most productive lands. At the United Nations, the High Representative of the Netherlands Crown, Mr A.G.H. Lovink, had repeatedly rejected Indonesian claims to be recognised as an independent interlocutor and legitimate party to the conflict, stating that the Republic’s leaders were Japanese puppets who had no popular standing. What could they represent anyway since ‘Indonesia’, in the Dutch view, had no tangible historical existence. It was a Japanese-sponsored invention, a make-believe – a territory whose only coherence had been provided by the Netherlands Indies colonial state. On 14 August 1947, Sjahrir rose to speak addressing the twelve members of the Security Council. He talked passionately and with great precision, methodically demolishing Lovink’s arguments in a speech which the diplomatic correspondent of the New York Herald Tribune[^3] stated was the most moving he had ever heard at Lake Success (NYHT , 15 August 1947).

During his two hours of sustained oratory, Sjahrir paraded over a millennium of Indonesian history before the assembled diplomats, evoking the historical example of Sriwijaya and Majapahit as the forerunners of a united Indonesia and symbols par excellence of the young republic’s territorial integrity. That speech opened the way for Indonesia’s eventual seating at the United Nations, first as a valid interlocutor in the ongoing debates in the Security Council on the ‘Indonesian Question’ and subsequently as a full-fledged member of the international body. It could be seen as the single most important diplomatic initiative of the Indonesian Revolution, ensuring that when eventually the Dutch launched their Second Police Action in December 1948, Indonesia had already won the diplomatic battle. The force majeure of the United States’ warning to the Netherlands that unless they returned to the negotiating table and achieved a long-term political settlement, they could forget the Dutch allocation of Marshall Plan aid for fiscal 1950-51 was the clincher here.

Sjahrir would later reflect as follows on the importance of history in the success of his August 1947 diplomatic mission:

> ‘Only the person who is prepared to look centuries back into the past, in other words, who has truly developed an understanding of history and of society, will be able to deal with the atmosphere of history which takes a revolutionary form with a proper understanding and certainty regarding that history’s direction and meaning.’

[‘Hanya orang yang telah sanggoep meninjau ke belakang dengan hitoengan abad, dengan lain kata, yang memang berpengertian tentang sedjarah dan masjarakat, akan dapat berhadapan dengan soeasana sedjarah jang beroepa revoloesi dengan pengertian serta kepastian tentang arah dan toedjoean sedjarah .’]

Through such understanding of the direction of world history Indonesia’s independence was won. Indeed, Sjahrir himself grasped this just weeks after Indonesia’s declaration of independence, writing in his September 1945 ‘Our Struggle’ (Perjoeangan Kita ) that the country’s destiny would be shaped by the ‘Anglo-Saxon’ capitalist camp – namely the rising power of the United States and the declining British empire – and that these together would determine Indonesia’s fate. And so it proved!

If the founder generation (generasi perintis) had lacked that historical sense, it is highly unlikely that the Republic for which they fought would have achieved its independence when it did. One thinks here of the pemuda leader, Sukarni, recently (7 November 2014) elevated as a pahlawan nasional. His instant grasp of the unique opportunity presented by Japan’s unconditional surrender on 15 August 1945 following the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atom bombs, ensured that Indonesia could present the returning Dutch with a fait accompli even if this meant taking the Indonesian leadership at gunpoint to Rengkasdengklok to force them to make the

declaration before the Japanese could act on Mountbatten’s instructions to freeze the political situation as of the 15 August and wait for British-led Allied troops to land in early September.

Should today Indonesia be confronted – as Burma currently is, according to democracy leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, with its ‘Second Struggle for Independence’ (in Burma’s case, the first was against the British, the second against the Burmese Army orTatmadaw ), would it be able to muster the historical understanding and sense of opportunity which that earlier generation manifested so strikingly in 1945-49? One very much doubts it given the current elite’s fitful understanding of Indonesia’s deeper past.

The case of the Boxing Day tsunami in Aceh is instructive here. Major tsunamis occur at least once every 80-100 years probably more frequently along Indonesia’s ‘Ring of Fire’, and there is even a local literary tradition dealing with such disasters, the Lampung Malay writer, Muhammad Saleh’s, Syair Lampung Karam (‘The Tale of Lampung Submerged’), published shortly after the devastating August 1883 eruption of Mount Krakatau in August 1883 is a case in point. It went through no less than four editions in the 1880s.[^4] Yet, the lessons of the Krakatau tragedy appear to have been speedily forgotten.

When a people forgets its own history, as they seem to have done in contemporary Indonesia, they not only lose their cultural moorings but they also expose themselves to huge dangers, the loss of any vital tradition of oral and written history of natural disasters being the most salient. In Aceh, upwards of 150,000 people died needlessly because they had lost their access to folk memory and wisdom. Yet on the adjacent island of Simeulue, 150 nautical miles off the west coast of Sumatra and very close to the event epicentre with only 10-15 minutes warning nearly everyone survived because they knew what to expect and immediately made for higher ground at the sight of the preternaturally receding tide.

Today, the same amnesia continues - go into any bookshop and you will find a fair few books on the religious and occult (tahayul) aspects of the tsunami event but nothing on the scientific aspects. Tsunami awareness is not even taught in schools, certainly not in my nine-year-old son’s school in Kelapa Gading which is less than ten kilometres from the North Jakarta shoreline. The result is continuing disaster and needless loss of life.[^5] That is why texts like the Syair Lampung Karam are so important.

So we are dealing here with two related yet distinct issues: the loss of a sense of history, and an alienation from vital cultural traditions which access ancient wisdom. There is in Indonesia today much unfinished history which has yet to be acknowledged, confronted and investigated. I am still struck at how effectively the Dutch brainwashed the pribumi population in the aftermath of the Java War to regard Diponegoro as a leader who was only concerned with his own personal ambitions – his supposed frustration at not being appointed sultan, and his outrage at the building of a road across his estate being touted by a succession of Dutch historians as the principle reasons for his July 1825 rebellion. Nowhere is there any mention in these histories of the deeper socio-economic problems which precipitated the five-year conflict, problems which would repeat themselves in the Southern Netherlands during the brief period of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands (181530). This would end with the Belgian Revolt of August 1830, a revolt backed – in contrast to the Javanese anti-colonial struggle of 1825-30 - by the major European powers.

In my view, the ultimate aim of the history is twofold: to achieve closure on the tragic events of the past, and ‘to resurrect the dead’ in the words of the father of modern Jewish historiography, Simon Dubnow, murdered by the Nazis in Riga in 1941.[^6] So what do these two processes entail?

The second is perhaps the more straightforward since it largely involves a sustained commitment to save the biographical records of previously forgotten individuals and their communities as Dubnow did for the histories of Jewish intellectuals and intellectual life in Eastern Europe in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. In my own case, my commitment has been far more modest and circumscribed than Dubnow’s: namely, the resurrection of just one key figure in modern Javanese historiography – Prince Diponegoro – whose own literary output in the form of his remarkable autobiographical chronicle has now been recognised by UNESCO as a Memory of the World manuscript. If this process is not embarked on, then one condemns Indonesian historical actors to the fate of the mystic monarch of the Toba Batak, Sisingamangaraja XII (reigned, 1876-1907), whose life-history has now passed into legend, his death by a single Dutch bullet to the chest in the timeless beauty of Mt Aek Sibulbulen (Kabupaten Dairi), script for an Indonesian version of ‘The Last of the Mohicans’.

The first of the historian’s tasks is, however, altogether more morally demanding since it involves a sustained willingness to confront, document and acknowledge the atrocities of the past, a process which Germany successfully embarked on as a divided nation in the aftermath of World War II. In the case of my own country Ireland, one could say that closure with the bitter history of 800 years of English colonial rule has been largely achieved through a similar painstaking confrontation with history over three generations since Irish independence in December 1921, a process which reached its final fruition in the aftermath of the April 1998 Good Friday peace accords. Queen Elizabeth II’s state visit to Ireland on 17-20 May 2011 was the first visit by a British monarch for a century (the Queen’s grandfather, George V, had visited in 1911 when the entire island was still part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland). It involved the largest security operation in the history of the Republic, and visits to sites of significance for Irish nationalism in Dublin such as the Garden of Remembrance and Croke Park, scene of the Bloody Sunday Massacre on 21 November 1920 when British troops had opened fire on a crowd watching a Gaelic football match killing 14 and wounding 65. The Queen also delivered a widely praised speech on the history of relations between the two countries.

Counter-examples of countries where history has either been conveniently forgotten or intentionally obscured abound – one only has to think here of Germany’s partner in crime during the Nazi era, Austria, and the sleight of hand which allowed it to pretend that it had been a ‘victim’ rather than a perpetrator during World War II. Yet it had its own death camps (viz Mauthausen-Gusen in Upper Austria) and its own particularly vicious brand of anti-Semitism. The election of the deeply compromised former Wehrmacht (German Army) intelligence officer, Kurt Waldheim, as Austria’s ninth president (1986-1992) underscored the moral ambiguities of this historical conjuring act.

In a completely different vein and in contrast to the case of Ireland, there is the example of Scotland. If one discounts the Jacobite rebellions of 1715 and 1745 which involved Scottish support for the cause of the former Stuart monarchy, it never entered into a war of independence against England. Instead, it entered into a free Act of Union (1707). This proved as important for the status of Great Britain as a world power as the relationship forged in the shared experience of Dutch colonialism which brought Java and Sumatra together as the core of the newly independent Republic of Indonesia. Yet, unlike Ireland it tended to be overlooked historiographically. During my entire degree period at Oxford (1966-69), I was never required to write essays on this key date in modern British history – and this, despite the fact that the Scots were far more heavily represented in the British governing elite than were justified by their picayune demography (just a tenth of the British Isles 60 million population). Scotland featured fitfully in British history – usually as a problem area associated with Highland clearances, depopulation, economic backwardness and more recently North Sea oil.

The result of this neglect – a sense of being taken for granted - became plain in the recent independence referendum (18 September 2014), which saw nearly 45 percent of the voting population support the independence option. If the vote had gone the other way, Scottish independence would have spelt the demise of the United Kingdom and its relegation to a ‘little England’ status reminiscent of its position in the pre-1688 period – namely before the landing of the Dutch king, William of Orange. This was an era when it had been largely marginal to European affairs, and a military nonentity, incapable of winning a single battle on the mainland of Europe for the best part of three centuries between Agincourt (1415) and Blenheim (1704).

So what does this mean for Indonesia? It is not the British Isles but there are interesting parallels. In many areas it has not confronted its past. In the case of East Timor, which was for a quarter of a century under Indonesian military rule, there is now a major resource for the investigation of that past in the form of the monumental 2,500-page Chega (No More! Stop! Enough!), namely, the Final Report of the Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in East Timor (CAVR). Originally published in Portuguese in February 2007, this contains the most comprehensive record yet of human rights violations, including deaths, displacements, torture, ill-treatment and threats in Timor-Leste between 1975 and 1999. In October 2010, it was translated into Bahasa and published by Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia in five volumes with an English-language edition following in 2013. But it has yet to be taken up seriously by Indonesian historians or politicians. As a result the sort of closure achieved in Ireland following the 1998 Good Friday peace accords is still many moons away.

When one turns to that great abyss in modern Indonesian history, the killings of 1965-66, the situation is even less evolved, and closure even more distant. There is as yet no equivalent to Chega. It seems that a whole generation will die and take their memories with them before there is any full accounting in Indonesia. The abuse of history in the long years of the Suharto ‘New Order’ (1966-98) still casts a long shadow. The futile attempts to obliterate evidence ‘not in accord with national history’ – one thinks here of Suharto’s burning of the genealogies (salasilah ) and books in the Kartowibawan, the senior branch of the Sukarno family in Blitar[^7] - and the deep compromises required of professional historians, such as LieutenantGeneral Nugroho Notosusanto and his military history unit, have both left a long shadow. Outside Indonesia, however, the tide is turning with the painstaking archival work of Vancouver-based historian John Roosa,^8 and US documentary filmmaker, Joshua Oppenheimer’s films, The Act of Killing (2012) and The Look of Silence (2014), both of which have won a slew of awards, the former even being nominated for an Oscar.

In May 2013, the political dangers of memory and forgetting – historiographical illiteracy if you will - became vividly obvious in my alma mater Oxford – that ‘home of lost causes and impossible passions’ (Matthew Arnold) when the Lord Mayor, Mohammed Abbasi, announced his commitment to fly the Morning Star (Kejora ) flag of the Free Papua Movement over Oxford City Hall every 1 December (Papuan Independence Day from the Dutch). One has to ask where were the Indonesian representatives in the UK in all this? Why were they not prepared to engage the representative of the Free Papua Movement in Oxford, Benny Wenda, who has openly advocated violence, in a debate on the future of Papua in the Oxford Union?

Unlike former Portuguese East Timor, there is a strong historical case to be made by Indonesia, but it has yet to make it. A lack of confidence in their understanding of their nation’s history might be one of the reasons why London-based diplomats are not engaging more effectively with this slow-burning fuse of the Free Papua independence movement. If a Sjahrir or a Sukarni were alive today it would be a different story.

What can one conclude from this historical kladeiscope? A nation that forgets - or worse turns it back on - its history runs multiple dangers. The possibility of root-andbranch reform such as that successfully achieved in the post-war era by the likes of Germany and South Korea will elude it. Indonesia, now a member of the G-20, may well outstrip Korea and level Germany as the seventh most powerful economy in the world by 2030, but if it cannot explain itself internationally what good will it do? It will remain a ship without a compass. In this age of the internet and global communications, the projection of soft power is as important as naval fleets and armoured divisions. History will be the key to Indonesia’s reconnection to its past, a sine qua non both for effective engagement in world affairs and the realisation of its potential as an Asian superpower. Otherwise it will be contemplating Friederich Schiller’s reflection at the beginning of this lecture and Kipling’s Recessional (1897):

>Far-called, our navies melt away. On dune and headland sinks the fire: Lo! All the pomp of yesterday, Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! Judge of the Nations spare us yet. Lest we forget! Lest we forget!

Kelapa Gading 26 November 2014

[^1]: Tony Reid, ‘Indonesia dan Dunia sesudah 66 Tahun (Indonesia and the World after 66 Years)’. Tempo (Indonesian edition), 14–20 November 2011. 

[^2]: MGI [McKinsey Global Institute] (2012). The Archipelago Economy: Unleashing Indonesia’s Potential. Downloaded 18 December 2012 at: [http://www.mckinsey.com/.../McKinsey/.../The%20archipelago%20economy/MGI_Unleashing_Indonesia_](http://www.mckinsey.com/.../McKinsey/.../The%20archipelago%20economy/MGI_Unleashing_Indonesia_) potential_Executive_Summary.ashx.
[^3]: New York Herald Tribune, 15 August 1947.

[^4]: This has recently been translated in rhyming couplets and skilfully edited by John H. McGlynn, see Muhammad Saleh, Krakatau. The Tale of Lampung Submerged. Syair Lampung Karam. Jakarta: Lontar, 2014. 

[^5]: ‘Jangan Berhenti Belajar Hadapi Tsunami’ [Don’t Stop Learning How to Confront Tsunamis], Kompas, 25 Nov 2014.

[^6]: The full quote reads: 'the historian’s essential creative act is the resurrection of the dead’ [tugas yang paling utama seorang sejarawan adalah untuk membangkitkan yang telah mati].

[^7]: Interview with Mas Wisnu Kartowibowo (great-grandson of Eyang Kartowibowo), Blitar, East Java, 24 October 2014. The burning of the Kartowibawan salasilah took place after Sukarno’s ouster in March 1966 and the concocted Supersemar (Surat Perintah Sebelas Maret) decree. (^8) John Roosa, Pretext for Mass Murder; The September 30th Movement and Suharto's Coup d'État in Indonesia (Madison: Univrsity of Wisconsin Press, 2012).