Peter Carey (Ed.), AAJ. Payen: Journal de mon voyage a Jogja Karta en 1825. The outbreak of the Java War (1825-30) as seen by a painter, Cahier d' Archipel 17, Pars 1988. XIV + 183 pp., 17 ills., 3 maps. ISBN 0244-5301. Price FF. 95.

MARIE-ODETTE SCALLIET

On 27 June 1825, Antoine Payen set out from Bandung for Yogyakarta, where he arrived three days later, on 30 June. His stay there coincided with the Dipanagara uprising which marked the outbreak of what later became known as the Java War.

The origins, the course, the consequences and the impact of the Java War on Javanese and European society have been the subject of numerous publications. The historian Peter Carey, professor at the Asian Studies Centre, Oxford, in particular has made a major contribution to our understanding of this tragic period in Indonesian history. His studies have revealed the complex economic, social and political conditions which inevitably led to the outbreak of hostilities after the long period of peace since the signing of the treaty of Giyanti in 1755.

As is now generally known, the war tormented a large part of Java and its population for five long years. 'Two million Javanese, one third of the total population, were exposed to the ravages of war, one fourth of the cultivated area of Java sustained damage and about 200,000 Javanese died. The Dutch also suffered: 8,000 European troops and 7,000 Indonesian soldiers who fought for the Dutch were killed." (P. Carey, 'The Origins of the Java War (1825-30), The English Historical Review 91-358 (Jan. 1976), p. 52).

Antoine Auguste Joseph Payen, whose journal covering the outbreak of the Java War has now been published in an edition annotated by Carey, had been sent to Java as official painter to the Natural Sciences Com- mission led by Prof. C.G.C. Reinwardt. He was born on 12 November 1792 in Brussels, trained as a painter at the Academies of Tournai (Doornik) and Brussels, and in 1815 was awarded first prize in a competition organized by the Société des Beaux Arts, Brussels. The following year King William I appointed him, by Royal Decree of 19 May 1816, as landscape painter to the Commission led by Prof. Reinwardt, who had been active in Java since his arrival there in April 1816. Payen's arrival in Batavia on 3 September 1817 marked the beginning of an eight-and-a-half-year stay in Java, which was interrupted only by a seven-month tour of inspection of the Moluccas and Celebes in 1824, when he accompanied Governor-General G.A.G.P. Baron Van der Capellen at his own request.

In 1823 the Government appointed Payen architect to the Governor- General. This is why he happened to be in Yogyakarta, to supervise construction work on the new Residence House, at the time the Java War erupted. It was under these circumstances that Payen became involved in the outbreak of the Java War.

The journal Payen kept from 27 June until 29 September 1825 constitutes only a fragment of his writings. It is nevertheless a unique document. Only one other journal of the same period, that of PEH. Chevallier, Assistant Resident of Yogyakarta, has apparently survived. However, this is not the only fact which justifies the publication of Payen's journal for the first time in 163 years.

Payen notes details with the sensitivity and the sharp eye of an artist, which gives a human and emotional dimension to his observations, making his journal a valuable additional source of information to the official civil and military reports. Of course, Payen's journal was never intended for publication. It is, as a result, a moving and highly personal account of his impressions, fears and views under the critical circumstances of the time. It immerses the reader in the tense atmosphere which dominated Yogyakarta during those seemingly endless weeks. On page after page one is made to share the fear of the besieged community, increasing from day to day. For the European, Javanese and Chinese population alike, the issue seemed fatal, since no one could be certain that the badly needed reinforcements would arrive in time. Even though he was in a privileged position - as a Government painter and architect and a personal friend of Assistant Resident Chevallier, who provided him also with confidential information, duly recorded in his journal - Payen seems to have been less than aware of the seriousness of the situation.

The original French text of Payen's journal is reproduced in an unabridged form and takes up hardly a quarter of Carey's publication. Justifiably, Carey has corrected spelling and grammatical mistakes, rather than leaving the text in its original form. In fact, it is Claude Guillot of the Association Archipel who has checked the French text (the transcription or interpretation of a few words seems debatable, but does not affect the general meaning). Annotations concerning the correct rendering of personal names and similar additions have been incorporated by Carey, who also provides a clear and concise summary of the text in English. One can only praise Carey's 'esprit de synthése', supported by a thorough knowledge of the subject, which enables the reader who has neither the time nor the courage to tackle the French text - which is not always clear - to acquaint himself with the contents of Payen's journal even so. Carey's introduction contains a short biography of Payen, based mainly on secondary sources, which are incomplete and sometimes contradictory. Nevertheless, conscientious original research has enabled Carey to establish for the first time the exact date of Payen's death as 16, and not 18 January (1853), as all other references have it The introduction unfortunately suffers from the attempt to cram too great a wealth of detailed information into too limited a space. It also contains a very detailed account of Payen's writings (a complete publication of which is currently being prepared). Of essential importance, however, is Carey's assessment of Payen's journal: the place it should occupy, its anecdotal character, and its great significance for historical studies.

Almost half the book is devoted to historical notes and Carey's commentary, which make it such a treasure-trove of information. With infinite, inimitable care, Carey has investigated all details which might contribute to a better and fuller understanding of all kinds of situations. Hardly a detail escapes his attention or is left uninvestigated. Notwithstanding, the work is not exclusively addressed to specialists; students of Indonesian history will also find the well-documented notes and commentary useful and inspiring. As is to be expected in such a carefully prepared study, an extensive bibliography and detailed index complement the edition of the text.

This publication confirms Carey's well-established reputation as an expert. It can be regarded as a logical continuation of his earlier work, in particular his Babad Dipanagara: An Account of the Outbreak of the Java War (1825-30), Kuala Lumpur, 1981. In fact, Carey's undeniable fascination with the historical figure of Dipanagara also becomes apparent in this study. Payen's diary provides him with the opportunity to approach the Java War from yet another angle. It is to be hoped that the publication of Carey's study will lead to the publication of at least some of the numerous manuscripts kept by the Royal Institute of Anthropology and Linguistics (KITLV) at Leiden, the University of Leiden, and the Royal Library and the General Record Office (ARA) in The Hague, so that our insight into Indonesian history and the Dutch colonial past may be further enriched. 
