a#Hinduism War, Peace, and Peace and Conflict Studies
by  S.I. Keethaponcalan

## Introduction

Hinduism, one of the oldest surviving religions, is practiced mostly by people in India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Malaysia. Hinduism and its fundamental ideologies are complex and convoluted, as the religion has no founder in comparison to the Abrahamic faiths that originated in the Middle East or is enshrined in a single document or the source of a belief system like the Bible or Koran. Hinduism encompasses multiple sources of written materials, none of which, one may argue, covers all rudiments of the faith. Since the centerpiece of many of these texts is war, they may appear to an outsider to impart the impression that the Hindu way of life is centered on war and violence. It is, however, clear that Hinduism is no more violent than other contemporary faith systems; ahimsa and tolerance are integral elements of the Hindu way of life. Mohandas Gandhi's nonviolent movement, for example, was based on such Hindu values. Consequently, if one is to understand the relations between Hinduism and peace, one needs to look beyond the texts. Hence this chapter examines the Hindu notion of war and peace and their relevance to peace studies from textual as well as behavioral perspectives.

As far as the texts are concerned, this chapter pays particular attention to Rig Veda, the earliest sacred literary document of the Hindus, and Ramayana and Mahabharata, the two most popular and revered Hindu

**[TEXT MISSING]**

glorifying the gods of early Hindus or the so called Indo-Aryans. The Rige Veda is one of several Vedas that date from to 2000 to 1500 BCE.<sup>4</sup> The Rig Veda can be depicted as one of the foundations of the Hindu religion as it provided the genesis for, among other factors' the caste based social structure of Hindu society. According to the Rige Veda the four major castes of Hindu society include the Brahmins (priests), Kshatriyas (warriors), Vaisyas (merchants, farmers and similar professions), and Sudras (servants or lowers cast people) who evolved from the body of the god, Purusha. The Brahmins or the upper caste evolved from Purusha's mouth and the lower caste servants or slaves evolved from his feet. The socio-political structure based on the caste system devised by the Rig Veda and other Vedas still remains strong within Indian society today and among Hindu communities elsewhere. The Vedas are still significant to this day.

Mahabharata and Ramayana are two of the most revered, popular, and available Hindu epics, which teach people the values of devotion, love, courage, loyalty, and dharma. Ramayana, which has transformed into a political tool in the hands of contemporary radical ideology groups in India, was originally written in Sanskrit.<sup>5</sup> The Sanskrit poet Valmiki wrote the original text, which contains 24,000 verses divided into 500 poems. There are, however, several other versions in existence throughout India and South and Southeast Asia. Significant among them is the poem composed by the Tamil poet Kamban that is called the Kambaramayanam. One can also find minor variations among Ramayana's, especially Valmiki Ramayana and Kambaramayanam. Notwithstanding the variations, Ramayana in general celebrates the life of Rama or Ram, the seventh century incarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu.<sup>6</sup> Today Ramayana could today be easily called the very soul of Hinduism and Hindu India.

Mahabharata was believed to be composed in the fourth century BCE by the sage Vyasa in Sanskrit and later translated into several Indian languages.<sup>7</sup> The epic contains 200,000 verse lines. Hence, it is classified as the longest Hindu or India chronicle. Vyasa adopted a story within story structure to complete his work, the core of which contained 24,000 verses. One of the sub-stories of the Mahabharata, the Bhagavad Gita provides spiritual guidelines to the followers of Hindu Dharma. The central story of the Mahabharata narrates the Kurukshetra war in great detail.

Critiques, more often than not, point out that the Hindu literary tradition is all about war and violence. For example, a noted scholar of religious studies, Robert Hume's analysis of some of the Hindu texts argues that "Hinduism as a separate historical religion arose in a state of war."<sup>8</sup> Rig Veda, for example, makes constant reference to war that was fought within Hindu tribes and with the dark skinned Aboriginal people. Hume further argued that "the contents of the Rig Veda clearly shows that the religion of Hindus took its historical rise in a state of intertribal and interracial war.<sup>9</sup> Mahabharata and Ramayana, the other two literatures also

**[TEXT MISSING]**

JWT potentially could assist in this endeavor. The point, however, is that the Hindu chronicles, well before the dominance of the Western-Christian hemisphere, adopted and advocated principles of just war.

Both Ramayana and Mahabharata constantly discussed conducting war in a just manner. In Ramayana, Rama certainly was not the aggressor and his war with Ravana was not an expansionist project. The Hindu and Indian culture define the husband as the guardian and protector of the wife. Therefore, Rama had a responsibility and he was in fact duty bound to liberate Sita from Ravana, which he did by defeating Ravana on the battlefield. It is also important to note that Ramayana and Hindus in general recognize Sita as the symbol of earth, and Ravana as the demon king. Rama's battle to liberate Sita was in fact a just war as he fought in an attempt to save the world from evil.

The principles of just war are present in the Mahabharata as well. Pandavas, who represented righteousness, were the lead characters in Mahabharata and ruled the kingdom from Hastinapura. Kauravas, cousins of Pandavas, who were depicted as having all immoral characteristics, lured them deceitfully to play a game of dice. The Pandavas lost the game and their kingdom and were forced to live in exile for thirteen years. The Pandavas believed they still had the right to rule the kingdom as they were cheated in the game. On their return from exile they asked the Kauravas to return half of the kingdom to them, which was rejected by the "wicked" Kauravas, which led to conflict. As members of the warrior caste who were champion soldiers, the Pandavas were ready to wage a war to regain their kingdom but wanted to give peace a chance instead. Hence, they undertook all feasible measures to do this including lowering their demand to retain five villages instead of half the kingdom and sending Krishna, the eighth avatar (reincarnation) of the god Vishnu to talk peace with the Kauravas. Duryodana, the senior member of the Kaurava brothers declared that "I will not give the Pandavas an inch of land, not even a needle-point of it." <sup>16</sup> The Pandavas, therefore, had no option but to fight a war to win their rights.

Eventually they defeated the Kauravas in the great Kurukshetra war and restored their rightful ownership of the kingdom. It is therefore imperative to note that although the Hindu literature glorifies war, it does not justify any war only just wars. Mahabharata constantly reiterates the importance of avoiding war and emphasizes the potentially destructive consequences, Mahabharata also asserts the need to find a peaceful solution to the conflict through the involvement of third parties. Krishna in fact was an inside-partial third party who tried to find a peaceful solution to the conflict to prevent both parties from opting to go to war. Most of the characters in the epic were killed in the Kurukshetra war and Mahabharata vividly describes the destruction caused by the war demonstrating the negative consequences of the war.

## Bhagavad Gita And Peace Work

Hindu literature, especially the Bhagavad Gita, has the potential to resolve one of the major dilemmas within PACS. Practicing peace or working to promote peace in different settings is one of the key ingredients of PACS as a subject. Peace workers, who operate in the real world, know full well that it is not easy to do peace work as they encounter numerous issues ranging from prejudicial attacks to abductions and even extra judicial killing. One of the major problems encountered on the ground is that there is absolutely no guarantee that their work will eventually lead to a peaceful resolution of the cases they work on. At the international or subnational level conflict outcomes may be obscured. More often than not, peace processes collapse leading to the recurrence of conflict or the resumption of war. In Sri Lanka for example, pro-peace individuals and institutions worked towards building a peaceful society for over two decades.<sup>17</sup> All the peaceful mechanisms built over time to promote peace collapsed in 2006 and the war was terminated eventually by military means in 2009 that led to a humanitarian catastrophe. It seemed that all of the investments made to promote peace in this war-ravaged country were wasted. There are two problems: (1) the Sri Lankan example creates doubts about the efficacy of peace work and (2) people who are involved in this business of peacebuilding can become thoroughly demoralized. Both problems remain one of the major dilemmas of practicing peace. However, the Bhagavad Gita may provide an interesting response.

The Bhagavad Gita is one of the sub-stories of Mahabharata. The refusal of the Kauravas to return half of the kingdom of Hastinapura to the Pandavas made the war inevitable resulting in the Kurukshetra battle. The forces of Pandavas and Kauravas lined up to face each other in the battle. Arjuna, one of the five Pandava brothers led the Pandava forces. Before the battle began he realized that he essentially had to kill members of his own family to win the battle. He sees "fathers, grandfathers, teachers, brothers, uncles, grandsons, in-laws, and friends" on the other side. He hesitates to fight and asks Krishna why he should kill his own family members for a kingdom. Krishna, the lord incarnation, which agreed to be Arjuna's chariot driver because of his love of Arjuna explains why Arjuna should not hesitate to fight the war. The conversation between Krishna and Arjuna or the preaching of Krishna to Arjuna is called the Bhagawad Gita, which in its own right could be considered as a separate epic. The Bhagavad Gita essentially lays out the Hindu philosophies of life and is considered by Hindus as a sacred document.

Krishna talks about various principles in his conversation with Arjuna trying to convince him to fight the Kurukshetra war. Eventually he succeeds in convincing Arjuna to fight the war. Krishna points out that as a Shatriya (warrior) it was Arjuna's duty of to fight the war and destroy the forces of evil. "Do your duty and do not worry about the outcome or rewards" is the essence of the Gita philosophy. This principle has grown into one of the cornerstones of the Hindu belief system. The duty of the peace worker is to selflessly work towards building peace. The lesson peace workers can extract from the Gita is that they need to just focus on their work rather than concentrate on the outcome of the projects or rewards. The lesson is not to be disheartened when your projects fail to yield the desired outcome and not to focus on awards such as peace prizes or appreciations.

## Elements Of Peace

This chapter is written on the premise that it is misleading to argue that Hinduism is solely a religion of violence, which emerged from Hindu literature that sheds only a partial light on the question of relations between the faith and peace. One needs to look into the Hindu way of life to understand Hinduism's relevance to PACS. Hinduism, as pointed out succinctly by Jeff Spinner-Halev, "is a practice-based religion." <sup>18</sup> Although one could easily delve into a myriad of subjects, for practical reasons, this chapter limits the discussion to the following three elements: (1) tolerance, (2) karma, and (3) panchabuda.

### Tolerance

The PACS literature often discusses elements such as mistrust and polarization among different groups, incompatible goals, unmet basic human needs, identity formation, intercultural miscommunication, and inequality and injustice as the root causes of conflict.<sup>19</sup> The lack of tolerance has not fully been explored as one of those factors that ignite conflict among groups defined by ethnic and religious factors. As identity formation intensifies and ethnic, religious and ideological boundaries are reinforced, groups become intolerant of the "other." Ethnic cleansing and genocide in Rwanda and Bosnia were unleashed by radical ultra nationalist elements in order to build an exclusive space for one group. Some religious groups globally have demonstrated their inability to coexist with other groups leading to separatist wars and intrastate conflicts. Hinduism and Hindu people, on the other hand, are known for tolerance, a trait not fully appreciated at least partly due to Hindu-Muslim tensions in India. A vast majority of Hindus, nevertheless, have demonstrated their capacity to coexist with other groups and are accommodative. Their ability to coexist derives from the tolerant nature of the religion itself. One therefore, cannot underestimate the significance and potential of Hindu tolerance for peacebuilding.

Spinner-Halev identifies two types of tolerance within the Hindu community: (1) internal tolerance, and (2) external tolerance. Internal tolerance is the recognition and acceptance of diversity among members of the community. He points out that "a Hindu may be a theist, pantheist, atheist, communist, and believe whatever he likes, but what makes him into a Hindu are the ritual practices he performs and the rules to which he adheres, in short, what he does.<sup>20</sup> In fact a Hindu can reject any of the fundamental principles or even a deity of the religion and still be able to call him or herself a Hindu.<sup>21</sup> A Hindu can leave the religion, practice another and later return to Hinduism without any difficulty. However, what concerns us here is external tolerance, the ability of the Hindu people to coexist with even major, presumably, rival religious groups. Below we discuss two cases whereby, in the first Hindus demonstrate enormous generosity towards Muslims and worship in Mosque, and in the second, they accommodate Buddhist practices in a Hindu temple.

The Hazrat Syed Shahul Hameed mosque, a Muslim place of worship, popularly called the Nagore Darha is located in the Nagapattinam District of the state of Tamil Nadu in India. Shahul Hameed, a Sufi saint, who is considered to be a descendent of the Prophet Mohammed, visited Thanjavur in the early sixteenth century and healed the ailing Hindu King Achutappa Nayakkar. In return the king donated two hundred acres of land to saint Shahul Hameed, where the saint was later buried. The Dargha was built on this land. Other Hindu rulers such as Raja Pratap Sing helped financially to expand the Dargha and allocated more land to the Mosque. More than 60 percent of the Mosque was built by Hindus and, according to the administration of the shrine, currently about 75 percent of the devotees who visit the Mosque to offer worship are Hindus. For these Hindus, worshiping in a mosque, has not posed a problem.

Compared to Nagore Dargha, the Kathirkamam temple is politically controversial. The Kathirkamam temple complex currently consists of Hindu, Buddhist and Muslim shrines and is very popular among the people of Sri Lanka. Kathirkamam originally was a Hindu temple dedicated to the Hindu God Skandha or Murugan and was used for worship mainly by Hindu Tamils from Sri Lanka and India. The temple also finds a place in the Hindu literature from Tamil Nadu. However, since the temple was located predominantly in the Sinhala region in South Sri Lanka, in the post-colonial period, the state interfered to make it more of a Buddhist place of worship, leading to the popularization of Katharagamadevie (the god of Kathirkamam). Although, this act created political controversy about the ownership of the temple, spiritually, devotees from the Sinhala, Buddhist, Muslim and Vedda (aboriginal people) communitics share the space without difficulty. The temple is a place where different cultures and customs blend together and religious tolerance is practiced to the highest level.

These are some examples that indicate that different religions can coexist and share common spaces. Although, Kathirkamam and Nagore are examples of Hindu tolerance and its accommodation of other religions, credit should also go to the other religious groups as well. The problem is that these examples are not universal enough. Violent conflicts and exclusionary politics will only subside when Nagore and Kathirkamam become universal phenomena.

Although race relations are socially a problem in India, the predominant Hindu state has politically demonstrated its extreme tolerance and accommodation of minority communities. For example, Indians have accepted members of minority communities into the top posts in political offices. Recently Abdul Kalam, a Muslim from the non-Hindi speaking south was elected President of India. Manmohan Singh, a member of the Sikh community which once fought militarily to form a separate Sikh state called Khalistan, is the present Prime Minister of India. Sonia Gandhi, an Italian national, has currently headed the Congress Party, the predominant Indian political party. Thus, the Hindu tolerance of other religious communities has been translated into political capital as well. In some other countries, minorities find it extremely difficult to reach higher political offices. In Sri Lanka for example, members of the minority communities cannot become the President, or occupy even the politically insignificant position of the Prime Minister. <sup>23</sup>

## Panchabhuta

Conflicts are caused not only by lack of tolerance but also lack of respect for fellow human beings and the environment. People are killed and resources are abused as a result of people's lack of respect for nature.
In contrast the concept of panchabhuta makes the environment and human body sacred and forbids violence against nature including the human body. The five elements of Panchabhuta form the matter in the universe and there are five elements that Hindus consider sacred namely Prithvi (earth), Jal (water), Agni (fire), Vayu (air), and Akasa (space). For example, the Hindus call earth mother earth and venerate fire at home and in Hindu temples. The Hindus believe that the Ganges River has healing powers and most Hindus make regular pilgrimage to the Ganges. What is significant, however, is that the Hindus believe that the life force is formed by panchabhutas. Prithvi is the most tangible or concrete of the panchabhutas and it can be touched and felt. The bones and flesh of the human body are manifestation of Prithvi and Jal is represented by blood. Since Agni is light, it is associated with sight while one's breath is Vayu and Akash is manifested by sound and emotions so that life is formed by panchabhutas. The whole purpose of human action, therefore, is to find a balance or harmony among all the five elements. Hence the human body is sacred for Hindus and one cannot violate something she or he considers to be sacred so that one must respect nature and one's fellow human beings. Conflicts will recede only when human beings evolve to see nature as inviolable.

## Karma

In the name of nationalism, patriotism and rights, parties to conflicts commit horrendous atrocities, including mass murders and genocide as if there are no consequences. Much of the carnage could be avoided if and when one realizes that there are consequences to his or her actions. Parties based on notions of just war may justify violence against combatants. More often than not, conflicting parties believe that they wage war to defeat evil. A common argument presented by warring parties is that they started the war and we have no option but to fight. There is absolutely no justification for the destruction of the environment and the killing of noncombatants, children and women and the use, for example, rape as a political weapon, as occurred in several contemporary conflicts. This is where the Hindu notion of karma can be used as a tool for violence mitigation.

The Law of Karma is one of the basic philosophies that guide the life of each Hindu. Karma is one of the integral parts of Hinduism as it figured in the early Hindu literature such as Rig Veda and the Upanishads. Although one could find karmic philosophies in religions such as Buddhism and Jainism, which also have roots in India, the Hindu notion of karma is significant. The term karma means action or deed and the philosophy of karma means one's actions have consequences, not only in this life but also in the next.<sup>24</sup> Therefore, it is linked to the notion of rebirth, which all Hindus strongly believe in. Karma can be divided into two types: good karma and bad karma. The good deeds of a man and woman lead to positive consequences and their bad deeds to negative consequences, because it is the karma that "determines the form and status of one's next birth." <sup>25</sup> The essence of the philosophy of karma is that "by performing good actions, one produces positive karma; immoral or irresponsible actions create negative karma. At some point, whether in this life or another, the karma we have generated returns to us: to our benefit, if good,; to our detriment, if evil." <sup>26</sup> Eventually, moksha (heaven) can be attained when one gets rid of all of their bad karma. Therefore, Hinduism stipulates that one needs to strive to realize one's good karma. The simple idea, which is relevant to PACS, is that one's actions have consequences. Even in conflict, one need's to be conscious of bad karma. People will not engage in horrendous violence and atrocities when they are conscious of the bad karma.

## Hinduism And Nonviolence

No discourse on Hinduism and peace can ignore the contribution made by Mohandas Gandhi who spearheaded one of the most original and effective nonviolent campaigns, which had its roots in Hinduism and the Hindu social structures of India, especially in Gujarat, a state within the Union of India.<sup>27</sup> Gandhi's nonviolent movement not only derived from Hindu philosophies but it also contributed immensely to world peace as it firmly established a philosophy and a practice for winning people's rights and goals through nonviolent peaceful means. European expansionist colonial powers ruled India for centuries resulting in violent resistance throughout the colonial era. During Gandhi's time as the leader of the independence movement, Subash Chandra Bose led a violent struggle for the total independence of India. None of these violent campaigns gained the total approval of India as a nation, at least partly due to the Hindu hesitation to embrace violence. The Gandhian nonviolent movement, on the other hand, captured the imagination of the Indian population, because Gandhi's methods were compatible with the values and philosophies of Hindu society. Also by leading a nonviolent resistance, Gandhi most probably averted a bloodbath and substantial human suffering on Indian soil. Eventually, the campaign led to the total independence of India from the British Raj. The name of the game was nonviolence in theory and practice.

It is, however, important to note that Gandhi's or rather Indian people's notion of ahimsa goes well beyond nonviolence, which more or less means not using violence, especially physical violence. In Sanskrit himsa means causing harm. The "a" before the word negates it, imparting the meaning not causing harm or injury.<sup>28</sup> Harm could be caused through violence as well as through other means such as words and nonviolent deeds. Consequently, the concept of ahimsa means to cause physical, emotional as well as psychological harm through violent or nonviolent actions. Hence, ahimsa has a much deeper and broader meaning than the concept of nonviolence. And it formed the very corner stone of Gandhi's movement.

Gandhi was very careful not to cause any harm to his British opponent and its agents in India. He was even willing to suspend his campaign when violence was used against the British interest. For example, in 1922, the Indian National Congress led by Gandhi organized a noncooperation movement to oppose some of the regulations introduced by the colonial government. In Chauri Chauri, a town located in Uttar Pradesh, police killed a dozen protesters and the campaign turned violent. The protesters drifting away from Gandhi's principles of ahimsa reacted rather violently against the police burning the Chauri Chauri police station. Consequently, more than 20 policemen were killed in Chauri Chauri. Gandhi immediately suspended the non-cooperation movement as he strongly objected to the use of physical violence.

A militant rebel would shed her or his enemy's blood and a terrorist would shed his or her blood as well as the enemy's blood. In contrast, a Gandhian satyagrahi would rather shed his or her blood than an opponent's blood. It is pointed out that a "true satyagrahi will willingly receive the blows of his opponents."<sup>29</sup> During the Salt March, which was organized in 1919 by Gandhi to symbolically oppose British authority in India, the satyagrahis or the followers of Gandhian philosophies were systematically struck down by the police who remained loyal to the British. Yet the satyagrahis lined up peacefully to receive the violence of the opponent. In fact, Gandhi believed that self-suffering is necessary for realizing the truth, and his fasting campaigns were based on the notion of self-suffering. Self-suffering for Gandhi was a nonviolent tool to alter the behavior of the opponent by moving the heart to change the behavior. He even undertook a fasting campaign to stop the communal violence between the Hindus and Muslims during the partition of India and Pakistan. Satyagraha, which means truth force, was the primary nonviolent tool Gandhi and he eventually won his goal of swaraj for India in 1947.

Gandhi's notion of satyagraha enmeshed with truth, more often than not was criticized as too idealistic and impractical and his opposition to the use of heavy machines and industrialization, was perceived as antimodernization.<sup>30</sup> For example, Sibley argued that "a machineless economy is his ideal, and his theory cannot be understood in the absence of it."<sup>31</sup> The machineless notion of social order, Gandhi envisioned, was signified by his spinning wheel that symbolized nonviolence, class and caste and religious unity, and Indian independence. No nation can survive in the global economy without a sophisticated process of production and the use of heavy machinery. Largely due to the idealistic nature of many of Gandhi's principles, the Indian state, which boasts of the legacy of Gandhi, had already abandoned some of Gandhi's ideals. For example, India has built up the third largest standing army in the world and developed its nuclear weapons capacity. Modern India has no special admiration for nonviolent protest, especially when practiced by opposing or dissatisfied groups. Thus, the effectiveness of nonviolent methods to win community rights in other societies can also be is[sic] questioned. For example, inspired by Gandhian methods, the Sri Lankan Tamils, the second largest ethnic community on the island nation, waged a three decade long nonviolent struggle for regional autonomy. The Tamils also extensively used setyagraha and other means of nonviolence such as fasting also used by Gandhi, in their nonviolent campaign against the Sri Lankan state. The Tamils nonviolent campaign failed to convince the Sri Lankan state to share political power with them. This situation does not, however, negate the potential of Gandhian methods to contribute to world peace and harmony. One cannot also underestimate the contribution of

**[TEXT MISSING]**

<ol>
<li type="1" value="25"> Mark W. Muesse, The Hindu Traditions, A Concise Introduction (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2011), 69.</li>
<li type="1"> Ibid. 70.</li>
<li type="1"> Howard Spodek, "On the Origins of Gandhi's Political Methodology: The Heritage of Kathiawad and Gujarat," The Journal of Asian Studies 30, no. 2 (1971); 361-372.</li>
<li type="1"> The Himalayan Academy, "The Hindu Ethics of Non-violence." http://www.himalayanacademy.com/resources/pamphlets/AhimsaNonViolence.html.</li>
<li type="1"> Mulford Q. Sibliy, "The Political Theory of Modern Religious Pacifism," The American Political Science Review 37, no. 3 (1943): 443.</li>
<li type="1"> Ibid.</li>
<li type="1"> Ibid. 444.</li>

##Bibliography

Alamu, Akiti Glory. "The Concept of Karma in Hinduism and the Christianity: An Appraisal." Asia Journal of Theology 23, no. 2 (2009); 244-265.

Brown, Norman. "Theories of Creation in the Rig Veda." Journal of the American Oriental Society 85, no. 1 (19635); 23-43.

Cummins, Joan. Viskhnu-Hinduism's Blue Skinned Savior. Ahmedabad: Mapin Publish: ing Ltd., 2011.

Davis, Donald R. The Spirit of Hindu Law. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010.

Fisher, Simon et al. Working with Conflict-Skills and Strategies for Action. London: Zed Books, 2000.

Hawley, John Stratton. "Militant Hinduism- Ayodhya and the Momentum of Hindu Nationalism." In The Life of Hinduism, edited by John Stratton Hawley and V asudha Narayanan, 257-265. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006.

Himalayan Academy, The. "The Hindu Ethics of Non-violence." Hinduism Today Magazine, February 1, 1996. http://www.himalayanacademy.com/resources/pamphlets/.html .

Hume, Robert E. "Hinduism and War." The American Journal of Theology 20. no. 1 (1916); 31-44.

Keethaponcalan, S. I. Sri Lanka: Politics of Power, Crisis and Peace, 2000 - 2005. Chennai Colombo: Kumaran Book House, 2008.

Millen, Richard B. "Aquinas and the Presumption Against Killing and War." The Journal of Religion 82, no. 2 (2002); 173-204.

Muesse, Mark W. The Hindu Traditions, A Concise Introduction. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2011.

Narayanan, Vasudha. "Tolerant Hinduism, Shared Ritual Spaces-Hindus and Muslims at the Shrine of Shahul Hamid." In The Life of Hinduism, edited by John Stratton Hawley and Vasudha Narayanan, 266-270. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006,

Neta, Crawford C. "Just War Theory and the US Counterterrorism War." Perspective on Politics 1, no. 1 (2003); 53-25.

Orjuela, Camilla. "Building Peace in Sri Lanka: A Role for Civil Society?" Journal of Peace Research 40, no. 2 (2003): 195-212.

Patil, Sharad. "Myth and Reality of Ramayana and Mahabharata." Social Scientists 4, no. 8 (1976): 68-72.

Pollock, Sheldon. "Ramayana and Political Imagination in India." The Journal of Astan Studies 52, no. 2 (1993); 261-297.

Rajagopalachari, Chak "Mahabharata." Edited by Jay Mazo. International Gita Society, 2002. http://www.gita-society.com/section3/mahabharata.htm.

Rambachan, Anantanand. "The Co-Existence of Violence and Non-Violence in Hinduism." Ecumenical Review 55, no. 2 (2003): 115-121.
