# Colonial Discourse and Javanese Shadow Theatre
From Shadows of Empire: Colonial Discourse and Javanese Tales by Laurie J. Sears

<!-- TOC START min:2 max:3 link:true update:true -->
  - [Scholars, Texts, and Performances](#scholars-texts-and-performances)
  - [Divisions between Secular and Islamic Elites](#divisions-between-secular-and-islamic-elites)
  - [Wayang Tales and "Hindu-Javanese" Literature](#wayang-tales-and-hindu-javanese-literature)
  - [Kusumadilaga and Court Performance Traditions](#kusumadilaga-and-court-performance-traditions)
  - [Nineteenth-Century Dutch Descriptions of Javanese Shadow Theatre](#nineteenth-century-dutch-descriptions-of-javanese-shadow-theatre)
  - [Javanese Memories of Older Shadow Theatre Traditions](#javanese-memories-of-older-shadow-theatre-traditions)
  - [Reflections](#reflections)

<!-- TOC END -->

As a small example of this [ie., Javanese exegesis], an explanation of [the name] Suyudana (Sanskrit: Suyodhana) can serve....: "First the tile king Suyuddhana: _suyud_ [submission] from _papingil_ [demeanor], _dane_ meaning gift; all the Kurawa submit [to him] and embody one kingdom; many are the gifts that the king of Ngastina bestows, with generosity gifts are given, good or bad its okay." Ex uno disce omnes!! - G.A.J. Haze on _jarwa dhosok_ (Javanese exegesis). From G.A.J. Hazeu, Bijdage tot de Kennis an bet Javaansche Tooneel (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1897). p.102 n.3. This Latin quote is from the Aeneid II.65. It refers to an incident in the Trojan War where Sinon helps to betray the Trojans. The full quote reads: "Crimine ab uno disce omnis." Roughly translated this would mean that a crime from one thing teaches us about all. The tone of the Latin quote is definitely pejorative. Thanks to A. L. Becker and Andrew Becker for helping to discover the source of this quotation.

_Carangan_ contains the root cang, cong etc. that expresses "slanting, awry, protruding..." so carang means "little protruding branches from a tree, where the leaves grow"; and carangan means "branching, a thin outgrowth from the main branch." _Jejer_ and _carangan_ are thus here technical names taken from the same image -quite accurately- the straight trunk and its small protruding branches." -G.A.J. Hazeu explaining the meaning of _carangan_. Ibid., p. 122 no 2.

Hazeu's readings of jarwa dhosok and carangan capture the very different thought-worlds that Javanese puppeteers and Dutch commentators inhabited well into the twentieth century. Each explanation seems perfectly logical within its own setting, yet strange to those unfamiliar with the rules of its context. To Dutch scholars in the latter part of the nineteenth century; jarwa dhosok or wayang exegesis, an essential part of every wayang performance that shows the cleverness of the puppeteer through his or her ability to execute creative wordplay, seemed incomprehensible and ludicrous. The best discussions of jarwa dhosok, folk etymologies or Javanese exegesis, are found in Becker, "Text-Building," and W. Keeler, "On Javanese Interpretation: A Scene from a Wayang," in Writing on the Tongue, ed. A. L. Becker, Michigan Papers on South and Southeast Asia no. 33 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies, 1989). To a puppeteer unfamiliar with Dutch philology, Dutch scholarly explanations and interpretations of Javanese words might seem equally odd. This chapter traces the development of Dutch colonial discourses on wayang theatre that arose in nineteenth-century Java and several Javanese responses to them. Javanese patrons, poets, and performers were exposed to Dutch ways of thinking in their contact with Dutch administrators and scholars in the latter part of the nineteenth century. In the twentieth century, expanding travel, technology, and communication diluted the Dutch participation in this process, and Javanese intellectuals began to realize that these new ways of thinking were a feature of European modernity rather than exclusively Dutch.

The European privileging of "authentic" texts and written histories slowly began to influence the ways in which Javanese authors and performers thought and wrote about their Mahabharata and Ramayana stories. Dutch scholars, missionaries, and administrators, as bearers of these European attitudes, helped to unsettle the Islamic associations of the wayang purwa, discussed in the previous chapter, by their efforts to connect Javanese "copies" of Ramayana and Mahabharata stories to their supposed non-Islamic Indian "originals." The scholars sought to create a corpus of written texts from the oral performances, and many tended to discount the dynamic ability of poets and puppeteers to create new tellings of the stories, for example the so-called lakon carangan or branch stories. The scholars wanted to discover or reclaim "authentic" Javanese traditions and began to see the puppeteers as the bearers of ancient "Hindu-Javanese" literary traditions that had degenerated over the centuries. Starting in the mid-nineteenth century, Dutch and Eurasian men of letters devoted themselves to the production and analysis of written versions of the shadow theatre plays. C. Hooykaas, in Javaansche uitgaven van Volkslectuur (Bale Poestaka)," Djawa 12 (1932) 95-115, noted that the Bale Poestaka alone had published 146 wayang texts by 1932. See Kenji Tsuchiya, "Javanology and the Age of Ranggawarsita," for his thought provoking discussion of the simultaneous birth of Javanology, the scientific study of Java, and the death of the Javanese pujangga tradition, the legacy of court poets and poetry. In the same period, Javanese authors produced new texts like the Pustaka Raja Purwa of Ranggawarsita and the Serat Sastramiruda of Kusumadilaga. These texts provoked two very different responses in the Dutch scholarly world of the late nineteenth century.

Many Dutch scholars and others interested in documenting Javanese literary and dramatic traditions focused excessive attention on the small percentage of Ramayana and Mahabharata texts within the larger Javanese manuscript tradition, resulting in the exaltation and philological reproduction of a certain portion of Javanese literary traditions as "Hindu-Javanese" art, to be distinguished from Islamic story cycles, pesantren (rural Islamic schools) traditions, and other genres of Javanese literature. In his History of Java, Raffles devoted forty-seven pages to the Mahabhatata, sixty pages to Hinduism and Buddhism, and only four pages to Islam, the religion of Java. (See Raffles, History of Java; K. A Steenbrink, Dutch Colonialism and Indonesian Islam, pp.73-74.) During his years in Java, Raffles became a member of the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences (Bataviaasch Genootschap voor Kunsten en Wetenschappen, established in 1778), whose primary attentions were devoted to pre-Islamic art and archaeology until the end of the colonial period. (Steenbrink, Dutch Colonialism and Indonesian Islam, p. 59.) Raffles set directions in the study of Javanese arts and culture that many Dutch scholars were to follow in the later nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

As an important step toward revealing this Dutch scholarly suppression of Islam and Islamic texts, Florida's catalogue indicates that of the 1,450 manuscripts in the archives of the Kraton Surakarta, only seventeen of the texts can be considered part of the corpus of the rewritings of Ramayana and Mahabharata kakawin texts of the late eighteenth-century Central Javanese literary Renaissance. Florida, Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 1:234-38. See Florida's excellent introduction to this catalogue of manuscripts in the library collections of the Kraton Surakarta. Florida also notes (ibid., pp. 17, 19) that in the manuscript collections of the Mangkunagaran-the minor Solonese court much more closely connected to and trusted by Dutch scholars and administrators-a large portion of the collection is devoted to various renderings in the style of Ranggawarsita's Pustaka Raja texts. Of these, many of the texts are Pustaka Raja Madya tales, the stories that follow the Bratayuda War and whose production was encouraged by if not actually undertaken by Mangkunagara IV. Florida's catalogue of the Mangkunagaran manuscripts is forthcoming from the Cornell Southeast Asian Program Publications Series. However, I counted at least 465 titles that are clearly connected to various genres of Javanese Islamic literatures, and this is without including kejawen texts, many of which are also clearly Islamic, or the many Pustaka Raja texts, which are also embedded in Islamic thought-worlds. The Dutch scholarly and political desires-and these are not easily separated-to minimize the importance of Islam in Java help to explain the increasing Dutch interest in shadow theatre traditions, especially those that retold Ramayana and Mahabharata stories, from the end of the Java War until World War II and the Revolution brought down the Dutch regime.

By the early twentieth century, Javanese shadow theatre had begun its transformation into the refined tradition nurtured by Dutch-educated Javanese nobility, Ethici, (The Dutch Ethic were followers of the Ethical policy advocated at the turn of this century by a number of liberal Dutch administrators and scholars who felt the colony was being run purely for Dutch profit at the expense of the Indies peoples. The Ethical policy shared some of the goals of the French _mission civilisatrice_, the desire to help "elevate" the native peoples through access to European language education.) and Theosophists, who will be discussed in chapter 3. Evidence from the nineteenth century, however, indicates that most Dutch missionaries, scholars, and civil servants saw the shadow theatre tradition as degenerate, decadent, and coarse, although several saw the possibility for its aesthetic and moral uplift and development. In contrast to wayang kulit (shadow theatre) and wayang wong (human theatre) traditions that were consciously cultivated in the Central Javanese courts in the twentieth century, nineteenth-century authors describe an earthy village tradition that appealed to village audiences. Dutch attitudes toward Javanese performances, literature, and history changed over the course of the nineteenth century as Dutch men of letters had increasing contact with Javanese authors and performers.

## Scholars, Texts, and Performances

As is common in societies with restricted literacy, poetic texts in Java often turned into performances that were heard by many who could not read; in turn, literacy in Javanese script did not always indicate familiarity with large numbers of written sources. Even in the 1980s, many of the shadow puppeteers I interviewed, who claimed that their fathers and grandfathers were literate in Javanese script, responded that their families may have owned only one handwritten book that was often read aloud. Certain court texts had a sacral quality which enhanced their power whether they were frequently read or recopied for future preservation. Books were regarded as heirlooms (pusake) as well as works of literature. For an insightful discussion of manuscripts as pusaka, see Florida's forthcoming catalogue of the Mangkunagaran manuscripts. Even today certain palace manuscripts are felt to be powerful (bobot, sakti). One of my Javanese assistants, from a large family of puppeteer, came back with a bad headache after copying a few pages from a Kraton Solo manuscript of the Pustaka Raja Purwa. She attributed the headache to the sakti (power) of the text.

In Javanese society, manuscripts were part of the oral tradition in that they both documented and enriched it. Both Hazeu and Pigeaud compared the Serat Kandha written traditions, discussed in the previous chapter, with the orally performed shadow plays. (Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Javaansche Tooned, p.128 n.2; Pigeaud, Literature of Java, 1:140.) In many cases the two traditions were quite similar because the authors of the Serat Kandha stories and the performers of the wayang plays were drawing upon the same narrative traditions. At that time the wayang tradition and the poetic rewritings of Ramayana and Mahabharata stories produced at the Javanese courts, sung aloud in tembang verse and read privately, were both highly stylized and able to process and disseminate cultural information that was passed from generation to generation. (Sweeney, in "Literacy and the Epic in the Malay World," discusses his distinctions between stylized and nonstylized literary traditions as a way of upsetting the dualist distinctions between oral and written textual traditions. Stylized traditions can refer to performances as well as written poetic texts. Sweeney suggests that authors used various methods of stylization as a way of preserving important social information for transmission to future generations.) Rather than seeing a disjuncture between performance and text, performances of written or oral texts were common entertainments in early nineteenth-century Java. Day, in "Meanings of Change in the Poetry of Nineteenth-century Java," p.40 ff., supports this argument for the intertwining-perhaps even the unimportance of distinguishing-between written text and oral performance. Day refutes the ideas of scholars who have argued that meaning is somehow secondary to form or sound. Sound and sense are mutually productive, and it is both patronizing and inaccurate to argue that "meaning" is less important for Javanese authors and audiences than it is for European ones.

Although members of the VOC had generally ignored Javanese arts and culture, during the brief British interregnum on Java (1811-16) Raffles and Crawfurd included accounts of the wayang theatre in their encyclopedic descriptions of cultural life in Java. (Raffles, History of Java; Crawfurd, History of the Indian Archipelago) These descriptions are important because they both predate the period of wide Dutch interest in Javanese poetic and performance traditions and indicate that British administrators did not associate the wayang tradition with court art or "high" art. As noted above, Raffles did rely upon the work of earlier Dutch scholars in his own monumental work. But D.E. Weatherbee's evidence that Raffles relied on earlier Dutch sources only confirms the point that eighteenth-century Dutch scholars did not have a high opinion of the shadow theatre. See D. E. Weatherbee "Raffles' Sources for Traditional Javanese Historiography and the Mackenzie Collections," pp. 63-93. In his discussion of shadow theatre, Crawfurd concluded:

>From this account of the Javanese drama, it will easily be seen that a play or piece is not intended to be a skillful and interesting representation of the real business of the world, or of human passions, enjoyments, and sufferings, but the simple and artless relation of a common tale... (Crawfurd, History of the Indian Archipelago, p. 18.)

Raffles was slightly kinder:

>The interest excited by such spectacles, connected with national recollections, is almost inconceivable. The eager multitude will sit listening with rapturous delight and profound attention for whole nights to these rude dramas. By means of them, the lower class have an opportunity of picking up a few Kiwi terms, and of becoming acquainted with the ancient legends of the country. (Raffles, History of java, 1:377.)

After these publications of Raffles and Crawfurd, and the end of the Java War (1825-30), Dutch and Eurasian scholars in Java and Holland became more interested in Ramayana and Mahabharata traditions, whether the extant literature in Old Javanese, the new Javanese poetic adaptations of the older poetry, or the shadow theatre traditions. As more Dutch scholars discovered that the Javanese had ancient literary traditions that could be traced back to the once glorious but now fallen Sanskritic culture of India, it raised the status of these traditions in Dutch eyes, but it also led many Dutch scholars to believe that the Javanese literary works were decadent copies of textual traditions that had originated in India. Starting in the mid-nineteenth century, Dutchmen began to compare Javanese tellings of Mahabharata and Ramayana stories with Indian tellings and to speculate about the many differences they found. A. B. Cohen Stuart, "Brata-Joeda, Indisch Javaansche heldendicht," Verhandaingen van et Koninklik Bataviansch Gemootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 27 en 28, 1860, and Serat Bratajoeda djarwa sekar macapat, 2d ed. (Semarang: n.p. 1877); Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Javaansche Tooneel, and "Hot Oud-Javaansche Adiparwa en zijn Sanskrt-origine," Tijdscrift vor Indisch Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde uitgegevan door het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 44 (1901): 289-357; A. Juynboll, "Drie boeken van het Out-Javaansche Mahabharata in Kawi-tekst en Nederlandsche vertaling, vergeleken met den Sanskrit-tekst (Ph.D. diss., Leiden, 1863), and "De verhouding van het Oudjavaansche Udyogaparwa tot zijn Sanskrit-origineel," Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 69 (1914); 386-418; Kats, Het Javaansche Tooneel 1; H. Kem, "Bijdrage ter verklaring van eenige uitdrukkingen in de wayang-verhalen Palasara en Pandu," Bijragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 16 (1869); 1-23, and "Eene Indische Sage in Javaansch Gewaad" Verspreide Geschriften 10 (1/76) 171-211; Ch. te Mechelen, "Een en ander over de Wajang," Tijdischrift voor Indische Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde uitgegeren door het Bataviaash Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen jaargong 25, 1879. In general the scholars considered the Javanese tellings to be corrupt. L. Serrurier, De Wajang Poerwa: Eene ethnologische studie (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1896), pp.28-31. These Dutch scholars, having been trained in philological traditions where ideas of accuracy and authenticity were highly valued, believed that the Javanese had misinterpreted the Indian myths and had distorted them by inserting all sorts of extraneous material into the main plots of the stories. W.H. Rassers, in Pandji, the Culture Hero, summarized the opinions of the early generation of Dutch scholars who wrote about the wayang. "The conclusion, indeed, appeared to be that the Javanese drama, in so far as it makes use of foreign material -and in which lakon is that not more or less the case?- consists largely of an accumulation of misunderstandings, and is a product of the most unsystematic confusion" (p.111). In his introductory apology for the confused state of "De Lakon Arimba," which he summarized and presented in Javanese script, G.A.J. Hazeu concluded: "Thus if one desires to sort out the Indian and the authentic Javanese elements from the chaos of present-day Javanese literature, an accurate reading of this epic [the Harivamca] is an urgent need too." "De Lakon Arimba," Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 49 1898, p. 370. In similar fashion, British scholars thought that regional Indian versions of Ramayana and Mahabharata tales had much spurious material and that most Indian texts were filed with unnecessary later additions. One response to these European philological concerns was the somewhat arbitrary production of critical editions of the Sanskrit epics which was begun in Poona, India, by the German-trained Indian philologist Vishnu S. Sukthankar in 1919. See Bruce M. Sullivan, Kresna Dvaipayana Vyase and the Mahabharata: A New Interpretation (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1990), pp. 13ff. for a discussion of German and English efforts to cut away the unnecessary cultural accretions in the Sanskrit epic texts. Hazeu expressed a version of these attitudes toward Javanese texts by his amazement at how the Javanese could have preserved their wild misconceptions in written as well as dramatic traditions.

It is understandable that at present the strangest confusions arise, that the old stories have undergone complete metamorphoses from the poor work of incompetent interpreters, that incorrect interpretations give rise to the grossest misconceptions, and also frequently to entertainingly fictitious stories. That is why-as Prof Kern says-the grossest of these metamorphose, misconceptions etc. are in fact not the consequence of imperfect oral transmission by the folk, but arise from bungled written texts. Thus "the running wild [lt. sinking back into savagery] comes from the books. Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Javaansche Tooneel, p.148. The text of Kern's to which Hazeu refers is Eene Indiche Sage in Javaansch gewaad, first published in Verslagen en Medadeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen Afd. Letterkunde 9 (1876), and the quote is from p.29.

What strikes the reader of this quote most forcefully is the juxtaposition of words used to describe Javanese traditions: confusion, incompetence, fictitious, gross misconceptions, and finally, the "sinking back into savagery" that typifies the evolutionary thought of the late nineteenth century. And Hazeu, as a follower of the Ethical Policy, was the most forgiving of the Leiden-educated scholars when it came to evaluating Javanese literary traditions. He was also particularly sensitive to the intricate connections between the written and oral traditions. Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Javaansche Toneel, pp. 145-46, and Oud en nieuw uit de Javaansche letterkunde (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1921).

Although Javanese Mahabharata and Ramayana tales had been inscribed in manuscripts and performances for centuries, the deepening Dutch interest in Javanese literature and drama introduced certain Javanese authors to the idea that their stories were not original and forced upon them the realization that they were even misconceived. Dutch efforts to document Javanese literary and performance traditions began to have an inevitable effect upon those traditions. An early development in the mixing of Dutch and Javanese intellectual worlds was the establishment in 1832 of the Institute for Javanese Language in Surakarta (Het Instituut voor de Javaansche Taal de Soerakarta) whose main purpose was the training of Dutch civil servants in Javanese. See C. Fasseur, De Indolegen: Ambtenaren voor de Oost 1825-1950 (Amsterdam: Uitgeverig Bert Bakker 1993), pp.55 ff., for a new discussion of the Dutch attempt to train its civil servants in Javanese language and culture in Solo after the Java War. The Dutch scholar Gericke and the Eurasians Winter and Wilkens, who took an active part in the literary activity of the mid-nineteenth-century Javanese courts, had an enduring impact on the Javanese authors of that period. See. E.M. Uhlenbeck, A Critical Survey of Studies on the languages of Java and Madura ('s Graventage: M. Nijhoff, 1964; H. Kern "Taco Roorda" (1928), in Honderd Jaar Studie van Indonesie 1850-1950: Levensbeschrijvingen van Twaalf Nederlandseo Onderzoekers, ed. Koninklijk Insituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde (Den Haag: Smits, 1976); H. Kraemer: "Het Instituut voor de Javaansche Taal te Soerakarta"; and Tsuchiya, "Javanology and the Age of Ranggawarsita," for more on the Dutch and Eurasian scholars in nineteeth century Java. Having been given some training in the traditions of Dutch philology, Winter and Wilkens were Gericke's main informants in his work on the production of a Javanese-Dutch dictionary to facilitate Bible translation and provide scholarly access to Javanese culture. While students at the Institute for Javanese Language spent six hours a day in class studying the Javanese language, they also attended a wayang performance once a week. (Kraemer, "He Instuut voor de Javaansche Taal te Soerakarta," pp. 270-73.) Fasseur notes that the Dutch students had contacts wth the Solonese and became conversant with court culture. (Fasseur, De Indologen, p. 63.)

Wilkens made major contributions to the famous Javanese: Dutch dictionary of Gericke and Roorda, spent three years of hi life in the Netherlands as an assistant to the Leiden scholar Taco Roorda, and taught at the Institute for Javanese Language in Surakarta For more information on Wilkens, see Kraemer, "Het Instituut voor de Javaansch Taal te Soerakarta," p.272; Uhlenbeck, "Languages of Java and Madura", pp.50-51; and Tsuchiya, "Javanology and the Age of Ranggawarsita, pp 80-81. This Eurasian scholar, who wrote treatises on the shadow theatre tradition and on Javanese history, set an example for Javanese authors by producing the first printed version of a shadow theatre play complete with the puppeteer's songs, descriptions in rhythmic prose, and dialogues. A. Wikens, "Wajangvoorstelling" Tijdscrift voor Nederlandsche-Indie 8, no. 2 (1846): 1-107; Pigeaud, Literature of Java, 1:248. But I question to what extent authors like Wilkens were documenting existing traditions, or whether they were shaping the traditions they documented through their own judgments about the materials at hand.

Speaking about his published wayang lakon, the lakon Pregiwa in Javanese script with Dutch translation, Wilkens said the lakon was told to him by the court dhalang Ki Redisuta. (Wilkens, "Wajangvoorstelling.") In his introduction, however, Wilkens mentioned that he had to omit many of the "platitudes" that never failed to appear in these plays. Even the missionary Carel Poensen, who spent twenty-seven years in Java (1862-85) and wrote extensively on both wayang and Javanese Islam, regretted Wilkens' handling of the published wanyang story. Wilkens had published a wayang story,

> the story of Pregiwa, wth translation and notes, which he had recorded from the mouth of the court-dalang of Soerakarta, leaving out, however, not only the songs of the dalang (in which the words are indeed quite trivial) but also 'the platitudes, that in the performance would not fail to appear.' _By this omission the example that he had wished to give has not remained a faithful and complete reflection of such a wayang performance_, yet with what he presented, Mr. Wilkens deserves credit and we would have liked to have seen more wajang stories published and elucidated by him.  
-Carel Poensen, "De Wayang" Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zandelinggenootschap 17 (1873): 138-64 at p.161. Emphasis added.

As Wilkens' Javanese text and Dutch translation was the first text of this type to appear in print, Wilkens was establishing the guidelines for a genre of Javanese literature that had previously been known only in manuscripts most often commissioned by the Javanese courts or in the private possession of puppeteers who jotted down outlines of plots to prompt their memories of particular stories. V.M. Clara van Groenendael Wayang Theatre in Indonesia: An Annotated Bibliography (Dordrecht: Foris Publications, 1987). pp. 11-12, notes that Wilkens' text was the first Javanese text of wayang play to be published. Summaries of wayang plays were not, however an invention of Dutch scholarship. The Javanese had been listing the titles of wayang plays and giving summaries of them in manuscript form since at least the latter part of the eighteenth century. See Florida, Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 7:216-17 Since Wilkens was considered to be one of the few experts on Javanese language recognized by Dutch scholars in his day, his decisions about what and what not to include were significant to the development of published genres of wayang literature. Although poetic and prose Serat Kanda texts and poetic macapat texts had transmitted the wayang tales in both written and oral as well as stylized and nonstylized forms, the production of both concise and extensive summaries of wayang plays in Javanese and their translation into Dutch added numerous texts to the written wayang literature.

The Institute for Javanese Language, considered to be a failure, (In Dé Indologen, p.66, Fasseur notes that G. de Serire, a Dutch civil servant from Banyumas who sent an evaluation of the school to the Governor General in 1898, complained that he found the history of Java no more evident as a subject of study than the wayang theatre, which he thought of little use.) was eventually replaced by the Royal Academy in Delft, set up in 1842 to train Dutch colonial civil servants, and the Royal Academy in Delft in its turn was moved to the University of Leiden in 1864, although a language training school for civil servants remained at Delft until the end of the century. As Uhlenbeck noted on the move from Delft to Leiden: "From this moment onwards the study of Indonesian languages, history and ethnology became intimately connected with the tradition of the scientific study of Oriental languages for which the University of Leiden was renowned already in the seventeenth century." Uhlenbeck, Critical Survey, p.59. Thus the orientalist bent of Dutch scholarship on Indonesia -the search for original and "authentic" texts and their translation and explication- was firmly established. At the same time that Dutch scholars and administrators were collecting and preserving Javanese tales, Dutch colonial policies were restructuring Javanese economic, religious, and political domains. A conjunction of scholarly and political domains appears here as the colonial government attempted to suppress Islam and as Dutch scholars began to reproduce "Hindu-Javanese" Ramayana and Mahabharata texts.

## Divisions between Secular and Islamic Elites

By 1830, the Dutch were more wary about Javanese Islam than they had been before the Java War. Economic pressures to fill colonial coffers brought the harsh forced cultivation system (cultuurstelsel) into the Javanese countryside from 1830 to 1870. For information on the cultuurstelsel, see C. Fasseur, The Politics of Colonial Exploitation, and P.B.R. Carey, "Aspects of Javanese History in the Nineteenth Century" The Dutch left the traditional rulers (the bupati or regents) in place, hoping in this way to keep the peasants pacified, but made the regents dependent on the colonial government for their salaries and their position. Under close Dutch surveillance, the regents were discouraged from identifying too closely with Islam, and by the early twentieth century, the regents were encouraged to turn to Dutch language education for cultural and intellectual models. Insofar as the Dutch-controlled Javanese administrative corps (pangreh praja) followed these rules, they could accrue limited political power and social prestige in the colonial state. At the same time that the status-oriented pangreh praja were accommodating themselves to their colonial rulers, they became more and more divorced from the peasants in the Javanese country side. Carey, "Aspects of Javanese History," p. 84. Although Fasseur, The Politics of Colonial Exploitation, is a meticulous study of the continental Dutch politics and policies that put and kept the cultuurstelsel in place, he does not devote much attention to the effects of the system on the social and mental worlds of the Javanese people. McVey commented perceptively on how colonial economic and political polices alienated both class relations and religious orientations in the Javanese countryside: "This already marked contrast was greatly intensified in the nineteenth century under colonial rule, when the Netherlands East Indies authorities deliberately set out to estrange the Javanese administrative elite, the priyayi, from strict Islam in an effort to remove that religion as a motivational force for their resistance and/or alliance with the masses." R. McVey, "Faith as an Outsider: Islam in Indonesian Politics," in Islam in the Political Process, ed. James P. Piscatori (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985) p. 201.

Although the Dutch inducted the Javanese administrative corps into their apparatus, they simultaneously repelled and persecuted the Islamic village leaders, the kyai. R. Mortimer, "Traditional Modes and Communist Movements: Change and Protest in Indonesia," in Peasant Rebellion and Communist Revolution in Asia, ed. John Wilson Lewis (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1974), p. 102; A. Kumar, "The 'Suryengalagan Affair' of 1883 and Its Successors: Born Leaders in Changed Times," Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 138, nos. 2/3 (1982): 270. As Kumar notes:

>Dutch policy strongly discouraged any link between the aristocracy of the principalities and what may be termed the intellectual leadership of rural Java, the kyais and hajis whose authority radiated from the rural pesantren [Islamic schools] rather than from the kraton.  
Here Kumar is referring to the special areas of Central Java which included the rival palaces (kraton) of Surakarta and Yogyakarta; these were the divisions of the Javanese kingdom of Mataram which the Dutch helped to create in 1755.

The Javanese kyai were Islamic teachers who often ran rural schools (pondhok or pesantren) which attracted young men in search of knowledge or power. Life in these rural schools revolved around the charismatic figure of the kyai. Students came to study with a kyai because of the amount of supernatural knowledge or mystical power he was believed to have accrued through the process of purifying and refining his inner being (bathin). Islamic scriptural studies were felt to be useless without the berkah or grace of the kyai to help elucidate the mysteries of the Arabic texts.

Throughout the course of the nineteenth century, Islamic orthodoxy became associated with lower social status, and the Dutch alliance with the regents insured that in times of stress, oppressed villagers would turn to the kyai for guidance and the organization of resistance. Mortimer, "Traditional Modes and Communist Movements," p. 100; L. Castles, "Notes on the Islamic School at Gontor," Indonesia 1 (April 1966): 42 no.27. As ties between Javanese Islam and the rest of the Islamic world tightened in the course of the nineteenth century, the strength of the kyai grew also. Of particular importance were the opening of the Suez Canal and the growth of the KPM (Koninklijke Paketvaart Maatschappij, Royal Mail Steam Packet Company), which turned the pilgrimage to Mecca from a journey of two years into one of two weeks. Carey notes: "In the latter half of the nineteenth century, with the spread of religious revival and the impact of colonial rule, each pesantren was turned into a potential source of anti-European and anti-priyayi sentiment. Carey, "Aspects of Javanese History in the Nineteenth Century," p. 101.

By the early twentieth century, when the colonial state finally decided to give their native administrative corps a Dutch-language education, the estrangement between the modernizing, secular priyayi and the oldfashioned rural Islamic peasantry intensified. Deliar Noer remarks: "To borrow the terminology of Snouck Hurgronje, the Dutch, through education, had indeed been successful in 'emancipating' part of the Indonesian Muslims from their own religion." See Administration of Islam in Indonesia (Cornell Modern Indonesia Project Monograph Series, Ithaca, 1978). p.4 At this point in the mythological and religious life of Javanese peasants, the war that was necessary to rid Java of the Dutch was as likely to be a prang sabil, an Islamic holy war, as the Bratayuda of the Mahabharata tales. According to Sartono, the idea of an Islamic holy war (jihad) was imposed upon all Muslims who needed to rid themselves of oppression by nonbelievers as well as to extend the Islamic community and purify the religion. Sartono Kartodirdjo, "Agrarian Radialism in Java: Its Setting and Development," in Culture and Politics in Indonesia ed. Claire Holt (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1972), p.91

## Wayang Tales and "Hindu-Javanese" Literature

Although the previous chapter described how Islamic mysticism was able to infiltrate and coopt the Indic authority of the shadow theatre tradition, Dutch authority never penetrated the domain of the shadow theatre in the same way. Although Dutch scholars were interested in documenting the tradition, they did not want to displace the Indic elements of the tradition with their own authority and imagery. In reaction to the Java War of 1825-30, when Javanese had risen up against the Dutch under the banner of Islam, and the bloody Aceh War of the last thirty years of the nineteenth century, which again saw the "docile" Malays-this time those of north Sumatra-rallying around Islam as a bulwark against Dutch aggression, some Dutch scholars and administrators in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries wittingly or unwittingly helped to carve out an area of Javanese literary culture that was free of Islamic influences. S. Supomo, in "The Image of Majapahit in Later Javanese and Indonesian Writing," in Perceptions of the Past in Southeast Asia, ed. Anthony Reid and David Marr (Singapore: Heinemann Educational Books [Asia] Lid., 1979) p. 181, suggests that the scholarly findings of Brandes, Kern, and Krom, which showed Islamic histories in the Babud Tanah Djawi to be inaccurate, furthered this tendency to nurture a Hindu, rather than an Islamic, Javanese past. See also Dan Lev's "Colonial Law and the Genesis of the Indonesian State" in _Indonesia_ 40 (October 1985): 57-74, where he discusses the Dutch appropriation of adat or customary law as a bulwark against Islam. One example is the plantation manager Karel Frederik Holle, who became an expert on Javanese, Sundanese, and Malay language and culture. He decided to manage a tea plantation in Sunda in 1856, helped set up a Teacher Training College for Native Schools (Kweekschool voor Onderwijzers op Inlandsche Scholen) in Bandung in 1865, and was appointed honorary Advisor for Native Affairs in 1871. Holle attempted to minimize the regious function of the Javanese regents who were head of religious affairs in their regencies. He railed against regents who took their Islamic duties seriously, and he recognized the dangers-for the Dutch-of the haji and teachers of Islamic mysticism. Haji is a title reserved fo those Muslims who have made the pilgrimage to Mecca, one of the five pilars or requirements of Islam. This discussion of Holle is drawn from Steenbrink, Dutch Colonialism and Indonesian Islam, pp. 78-80. Steembrink also notes the pervading fear among Europeans in Java that the natives would rise up and slaughter the Dutch pp. 81-84). In this light, the so-called Indian Mutiny of 1857 which claimed 40,000 Indian and British lives, seemed a warning to the Dutch in the Indies.

Another way to minimize the threat of Islam involved the scholarly attempt to discover the authentic "Hindu" roots of Javanese textual traditions. Late nineteenth-and early twenteth-century Dutch scholars reclaimed the notion of a "Hindu-Javanese" epoch in Javanese history, introduced by Stamford Raffles in the early nineteenth century to refer to that period of Java's past that had seen the adoption and adaptation of so many Indian religious, cultural, legal, and textual traditions. The term "Hindu-Javanese" is mileading for several reasons: the word Hinduism, itself a nineteenth-century colonial creation, does little more than distinguish a complex array of beliefs and practises in the subcontinent from others that are more clearly Islamic, Buddhist, or Christian; some, but certainly not all, of the influence that came to Jawa from India could be caled Hindu; and, lastly, the separation of local Javanese belief from what was presumed to have come from India is an overvhelning and rather unproductive exercise. Th. Pigeaud said as much based on his extensive reseach in the 1920s in Javaanse Volksvertoningen, p 32. He objected to the tendencies in most Dutch scholarship to separate court from village traditions and to separate Hindu-Javanese from Islamic traditons, expecially after four centuries of Islamic influence in Java. Pigeaud's opinions, however, were always a bit different from the scholarly community in Leiden. F.D.K. Bosch comments on the ease with which the nineteenth-century scholars concluded that only Hindus could have been responsible for the great artistic remains found on Java:

>No wonder that since the days of Raffles those authors in their publications spoke, without further comment, of Hindu art, Hindu society, Hindu civilisation etc., thus expressing that, in the realisation of all this, no others than the Hindus had participated. The only possibilty generally admitted of the native population having at least played some part in the creative process, was that the degeneration and debilitation of the formerly noble race of Hindu artists were ascribed to the intermarriage of Indians with Indonesians. This was held to be the clear sign of decay alleged to be noticeable in the later phases of Hindu-Javanese art- a decay which finally resulted in the art entirely vanishing from the island of Java.  
F.D.K. Bosch, "The Problem of the Hindu Colonisation of Indonesia" (1946) in Selected Studies in Indonesian Archeology, KITLV Translation Series (The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1961, p.5. For an explication of this view, see especially N. J. Kron's Hindoe-Javvansche Geschiedenis, 2d ed. ('s Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1931).

The Dutch colonial presence was supposed to counter the internal decay of the Javanese courts in the political realm at the expense of draining away their power and prestige, (Cf.D.J. Steinberg et al, In Search of Southeast Asia (New York: Praeger, 1971), p.147.) and some scholar-administrators by the turn of the century hoped that the nurturing of a "Hindu-Javanese" past that included a focus on Mahabharata and Ramayana traditions might diminish the authority of Islam in the social and cultural realms as well as the political one. See Fasseur, De Indologen, for a careful study of the increasingly close connections between the civil servants who worked for the colonial government and the rise of Indology at the State University of Leiden.

Dutch influence on Ramayana and Mahabharata traditions was felt in proportion to the amount of exposure the Javanese had to Dutch ideas and especially to Dutch language. A Dutch-language education radically changed the ways in which these stories were meaningful for Javanese elites while village traditions changed more gradually. In chapters 3 and 4 I explore the results of these transformations; here, however, I suggest that by their focus on non-Islamic stories and by their prolific efforts to document "Hindu-Javanese" traditions, Dutch scholars slowly altered the interlacing of Islamic knowledges and Ramayana and Mahabharata traditions and the ways in which these stories passed on meaningful information. As Sweeney noted for Malay literary traditions: "In carving out the area of Malay discourse to be labeled 'history,' colonial scholars assumed the existence of a boundary between fictionality and referentiality similar to their own." (Sweeney, "Literacy and the Epic in the Malay World," p. 25.) This holds true for the Dutch reaction to the Javanese literary and dramatic traditions as well. Dutch scholars, as part of the colonial fascination with describing and labeling, cut through genre and text with ideas that had been generated in the European scholarly world, ideas that had little meaning within Javanese society. In the same essay, Sweeney argues elegantly against applying these European standards to the Malay traditions he studied:

>if, accepting for the sake of argument that the Ramayana and Mahabharata are epic poems, it be proposed that the Hidayat Seri Rama and the Hikayat Pandawa [i.e. Malay telings of Ramayana and Mahabharata stories] deserve the appellation "epic" because they are translations of the Hindu epics, one must respond that they are neither translations, Hindu, nor poems.

In Java the situation was a bit different. Poems recounting episodes from the Mahabharata and Ramayana tales were written at the Javanese court in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, and Javanese authors considered these poems to be reworkings of older poetry that was, albeit rarely, translated from extant Sanskrit works. The Old Javanese poems were Indic or at east had been produced at courts where Shaivism, Vishnuism, and Buddhism were major religious traditions. In the nineteenth-century courts, the reworkings of the older poetry had served to legitimize ruling dynasties by linking those dynasties to the glory of the earlier kingdoms. Shaivite, Vishnuite, and Buddhist ideas were intertwined with Islamic mystical conceptions that never entirely negated the earlier beliefs. Sweeney's dissatisfaction with the word epic, however, would also apply to Javanese Ramayana and Mahabharata traditions. Rather than "epic," most Javanese considered the wayang plays that were the main vehicles for the transmission of Ramayana and Mahabharata tales to be crita or stories, and, in nineteenth-century Java, crita and babad (chronicle/historical text) were not far apart.

Pigeaud has commented upon the increasing Javanese tendency to associate myth and history by arranging the mythic shadow play stories in chronological order.

>In the course of time wayang plays were arranged in chronological order as if they were descriptions of episodes of a history. In the flourishing renaissance period of Surakarta literature, in the nineteenth century, the tendency of associating mythic and epic wayang play with history grew particularly strong. Its beginning was aleady visble in the Pais period. (Pigeaud, Literature of Java, 1:140)

Post Enlightenment European ideas of a scientific, linear history that was considered to be an objective approximation of reality differed from certain Javanese perceptions of the past in which histories were written, sung, and told for aesthetic, didactic, and political purposes. (C.C. Berg, "The Javanese Picture of the Past," in An Introduction to Indonesian Historiography, ed. Soedjatmoko (Ithaca: Cornell University Press: 1965); cf M.C. Ricklefs, Modern Javanese Historical Tradition (London: University of London, School of Oriental and African Studies, 1978). The way that Javanese authors arranged the Ramayana and Mahabharata stories in what they believed to be chronological order more closely approximated the way that Islamic scholars had arranged the hadith (oral traditions about the Prophet) to produce their early historical texts. Cf. D. Henige, Oral Historiography, pp. 11-13. Pigeaud, Literature of Java, 1:39, notes that Islamic concept of continuity may have "sharpened" the historical views of pesisir authors of the Serat Kandha tale. Since many Javanese considered these stories to be tales of the ancestors of the Javanese nobility, (Hazeu Oud en nieuw uit de Javaansche letterkunde, p.6; Poensen, "De Wajang." p.159) it is not surprising that as Javanese literati were exposed to Dutch conceptions of history, their perceptions of the Ramayana and Mahabharata tales as a form of Javanese history would be strengthened rather than diminished.

The relations between myth and history in Dutch and Javanese intelectual worlds in the mid-nineteenth century can be studied as a microcosm of colliding worldviews. Raymond Willams observed the post Renaissance European transformation of historical and literary domains and noted that "The 'national literature' soon ceased to be a history and became a tradition." Williams, Marxism and Literature (Oxford: Oxford Univerity Press, 1977), p. 51. It is just this process that was taking place in nineteenth century Java. In the era of dialectical materialism and social Darwinism, Dutch scholars were documenting Javanese traditions in an atmosphere where history was seen as a linear trajectory moving from the past into the future. Along with such linear conceptions of history, discourses of progress, profit, and natural selection were soon to form the rationale for expanding the imperial project in economic and intellectual domains. The cultuurstelsel (cultivation system) of the mid-nineteenth century (1830-70) had turned the Indies into a successful profit making venture, and during this period the Dutch began to move out from their strongholds in Batavia, Priangan, the pasisir and other parts of Java into Sumatra, the Celebes, and Kalimantan. History became an evolving destiny that posited the highly evolved Dutch as the "natural" rulers of the Indies and the Javanese as their natural subjects.

In support of Dutch claims to superiority was the obvious Javanese lack
of proper written histories, although the Javanese were certainly the most "advanced" of the societies that the Dutch encountered and conquered in the archipelago. Hazeu, in Oud en nieuw uit de Javaansche letterkunde, p. 4, summarizes the opinions of J.L. A. Brandes, “lets over een ouderen Dipanegara in verband met een prototype van de voorspellingen van Jayabaya,” Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde uitgegeven door het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 32 (1889): 368-430, who argued that the Javanese babad or chronicles should be seen as handbooks of Javanese literature with occasional historical facts thrown in here and there. All that the Javanese had were myths, in Dutch scholarly eyes, and the myths were Indian to begin with. Moreover, the Javanese had not even understood the myths correctly. They were all confused, and Dutch philology was needed to sort them out. (Tsuchiya, “Javanology and the Age of Ranggawarsita.”) A succinct example of these views was voiced by the missionary Poensen in 1873 in his speculations on the origins of the shadow theatre.

>So we would then obviously come to the Hindoe’s, and we are certainly closest to the truth if we assume that with their help and under their guidance the first wajang-performance took place in Java. The idea for this may have been inspired from what was available, and their own mythological history offered the material for the lakon [plays]. Who knows whether they just wanted to keep alive in this way the memory of their great heroes and gods from the Mahabharata and Ramayana among their children and grandchildren in Java who never set foot on mainland Asia; and how in the course of time, with the degeneration of the Hindoe descendants and their blending, to a greater or lesser extent, with the native population of this island, the stories themselves were also more or less changed; so that finally in the consciousness of the people, the real origin was lost, and Java was made the theatre where all those histories had once taken place; similarly nowadays the average native sees in the wajang stories nothing other than so many parts of his ancient native history. Poensen, "De Wajang." pp. 143-44

Poensen's remarks suggest that for the Javanese, wayang stories may indeed have been seen as preserving the stories of the Javanese past. The connections that some Javanese made between Mahabharata stories and history even had precedents in India, where this particular story cycle was seen by many Indians as _itihasa_ or history, Sullivan, Kṛ̣ṣṇa Dvaipayana Vyasa and the Mahabharata, p.6 n.24. In India, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata were considered to be smṛti rather than śruti, the Sanskrit words for, respectively, that which was remembered and that which was revealed. In addition, the Mahabharata was considered itihasa (“thus it occurred”), the Sanskrit word for story or history, and the Ramayana was caritra, the Sanskrit word for the adventures or exploits of a hero. Monier Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary (1899; Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1976), p.389. In addition to Ramayana and Mahabharata tales as histories/stories of the ancestors, Javanese literati also wrote court chronicles or bad for specific purposes. (Berg, “The Javanese Picture of the Past.” See also Ricklefs, Jogjakarta under Sultan Mangkubumi, and his Modern Javanese Historical Tradition.) Court chronicles, usually composed in poetic form, and shadow plays were shaped and stylized, showing that both were considered important vehicles for the preservation of knowledge. The idea of written prose histories describing "ordinary" events was not necessarily new for the Javanese; rather it may have been that they were not considered valuable or worthwhile. But the wretchedly poor Javanese court poet R. Ng, Ranggawarsita, who served as translator and (walking encyclopedia) for several Dutch scholars in Solo in the mid-nineteenth century, may have thought that he would impress the Dutch, and be reimbursed for his efforts, if he produced written prose histories, full of dates, that linked the ancient tales to the more recent Javanese past.

The different boundaries between myth and history in Javanese and Dutch intellectual worlds, and Dutch scholarly identifications of history with “objectivity” and prose writing, become clear by the end of the nineteenth century in the Dutch rejection of Ranggawarsita’s magnum opus on Javanese history, the Pustaka Raja or Book of Kings. For the study of Javanese Ramayana and Mahabharata tales, the Pustaka Raja Purwa texts are the most significant part of Ranggawarsita’s work. However, the first 730 years of Ranggawarsita’s history, which contain the Ramayana and Mahabharata tales until the end of the Bratayuda War, are followed by the Pustaka Raja Madya texts, which bring the history to the solar date of around 1100, and finally the Pustaka Raja Puwara texts, which fill in the years up to at least the fall of Majapahit in the conventional Javanese year, and Ranggawarsita’s solar year, of 1400. All these texts together make up Ranggawarsita’s Pustaka Raja corpus. The series is preceded by the Serat Paramayoga, which gives genealogical information and creational stories of the founding of human populations in Java. See Day, “Meanings of Change in the Poetry of Nineteenth-century Java,” pp. 220-32; G.W.J. Drewes, “Ranggawarsita, the Pustaka Raja Madya and the Wayang Madya,” Oriens Extremus 21 (1974): 199-215; Florida, Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 1:154-64; and Pigeaud, Literature of Java, 1:170-71. Although Ranggawarsita is credited with the authorship of the Pustaka Raja in the mid-nineteenth century, the texts were reinscribed many times during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The texts I have looked at most carefully, which were kindly photocopied for me by the librarians at the Radya Pustaka library in Surakarta, were published by N. P. Voeren H. Boening, Ngayogyakarta, in 1906. Ki Padmosusastro is the person who either inscribed the texts or “validated the literature by the criteria of the Serat Paramasastra (kaesahaken kasusastranipun awewaton Serat Paramasastra).” The multi-volumed Javanese texts, which the ruler of the lesser court in Surakarta, Mangkunagara IV, proclaimed to be both authentic and ancient, were eventually scorned as spurious by the Dutch scholars of the Bataviaasch Genootschap, (Day, “Meanings of Change in the Poetry of Nineteenth-century Java,” pp. 185-89.) who had decided that the texts were neither authentic nor ancient. The texts were Javanese, of course, but they were considered to be polluted by Ranggawarsita’s misunderstandings, or mimicry, of European conceptions of history. Poerbatjaraka, the first Javanese scholar to receive a degree in Javanese literary and historical studies at Leiden (1926), was also contemptuous of Ranggawarsita’s monumental work. In his survey of Javanese literature, Poerbatjaraka comments:

>The Pustaka-radja book is basically concocted from books of wajang plays [lakon] based on stories that R. Ng. Ranggawarsita heard from his friends, and tales that already existed at that time. All of that was changed around and expanded by R. Ng. Ranggawarsita himself according to his own whims.

Although those are the facts, in short the Pustaka-radja book in large part contains just NONSENSE [OMONG-KOSONG] from R.Ng. Ranggawarsita. (R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Kepustakaan Djawa (Djakarta: Penerbit Djambatan, 1952), pp. 186-87. In the Javanese language edition of his book (also published by Penerbit Djambatan in 1952), Poerbatjaraka mentions that Ranggawarsita’s “friends” were Dutch, and elsewhere in the book he mentions C.F. Winter and Cohen Stuart. Poerbatjaraka notes that these books by Ranggawarsita were published in Javanese script twice: the first time by H. Buning in 1884, the second time in 1906 (p. 187). E.M. Uhlenbeck expands on this by noting that the books were published in nine volumes between 1884 and 1906, and a second edition in eight volumes was published between 1904 and 1908. Uhlenbeck laments that there are no plans to publish “these important documents of Javanese historiography,” by which one must assume he meant to publish them in latin script or translate them into Indonesian for a wider audience. A Critical Survey of Studies on the Languages of Java and Madura, p. 130.)

Dutch scholars were so disappointed with these texts that they have never been translated, summarized, or given the critical apparatus accorded to so many other ancient and a few modern Javanese texts, especially those that retold the Mahabharata and Ramayana stories. Ranggawarsita’s Pustaka Raja Purwa, like the earlier Serat Kandha texts, saw the Mahabharata and Ramayana stories as intermediary episodes between cosmogonic Islamic genealogies and the tales of historical Javanese kings. What Ranggawarsita had done was to give both solar and lunar dates —dates that differed by only about twenty-two years, resembling the relationship between the solar Gregorian Calendar and the lunar Javano-Arabic one— to all these episodes, as though they had really happened in a very distant past. In addition to the chronogram style of dating familiar to Dutch scholars from Old Javanese poetic texts—and considered to be “authentic”—he more or less created his own dating system. He also retold the wayang tales, and many other tales as well, in prose rather than poetry. The Pustaka Raja texts, in fact, reflect a concern with dates that in turn mirrors or mimics what may have seemed to this mid-century Javanese intellectual to be a Dutch scholarly obsession with dates. By giving fictive solar and lunar dates, older-style candrasengkala (chronograms), and even Javanese seasonal dates to each event in his chronologies, Ranggawarsita discredited or put into question all dates in his distinctive methodological and literary world.

Ranggawarsita’s method seems to have touched on an area of Dutch intellectual sensitivity as the Dutch Indologists themselves were busily establishing boundaries between Javanese myth and history. Ranggawarsita spent a lot of time with C.F. Winter and Wilkens as well as with J.F.C. Gericke, A.B. Cohen Stuart, and Palmer van den Broek. Is it conceivable that Ranggawarsita understood so little about Dutch philology—for which he served as “de vraagbaak bij uitnemendheid” (the walking encyclopedia par excellence) This expression, from the Dutch scholar-administrator G.A.J. Hazeu, Oud en nieuw uit de Javaansche letterkunde, p. 19, was also quoted in an essay on the wayang theatre by Poerwoto Prawirohardjo, “Kesoesasteraan Indonesia Djawa” in the Indies intellectual journal Poedjangga Baroe 1, no. 8 (Pebroeari 1934): 256-59. —that he failed to realize that his work might not fit within the boundaries of European conceptions of history? I suggest that it makes as much sense to see Ranggawarsita’s Book of Kings as a kind of grand spoof on Dutch historical and philological methods as it does to see it as either a confused synthesis of Javanese history and myth or a failed attempt at European historical writing. (Florida’s essay, “Reading the Unread in Traditional Javanese Literature,” proves that Ranggawarsita had a sharp sense of humor as well as cynical ideas about achieving wordly fame. Day, in “Meanings of Change in the Poetry of Nineteenth-century Java,” pp. 225-32, summarizes Dutch attitudes toward Ranggawarsita’s Pustaka Raja and suggests that the texts can best be understood within prophetic genres of Javanese writings. In several personal communications in July 1995, Alan Feinstein helped to clarify many of these issues for me.) The work of Dutch scholars like Hazeu and retired ambtenaren (civil servants) like Humme, discussed below, shows that Ranggawarsita may have had good reason to believe that the many Dutchmen around him were also engaged in the project of dating and writing down Javanese mythological tales. In his own explanation of how the texts were compiled, Ranggawarsita described how King Aji Jayabhaya of Kadhiri, a historical king from the mid-twelfth century, sent his scholars out to collect data by compiling and comparing older histories and genealogical data. (Padmosusastro, Serat Pustaka Radja Purwa, vol. 6 (Ngajogjakarta: N. P. Voeren H. Boening, 1906), p. 1; Day, “Meanings of Change in the Poetry of Nineteenth-century Java,” 223-24.) These may have been the historical methods to which Ranggawarsita had been introduced by the Dutch scholars in Solo when they sent him out into the villages to collect and record shadow play stories.

Although Pustaka Raja texts were copied and recopied in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, (Florida, Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 1:154-72.) most Dutch scholars have turned their backs on this genre of wayang texts. If one looks through Clara van Groenendael’s very useful bibliography of mostly Dutch, English, Javanese, and Indonesian scholarship on the wayang theatre (Wayang Theatre in Indonesia: An Annotated Bibliography), out of 564 entries she does not mention one Pustaka Raja Purwa text, although she makes one or two references to the existence of these texts, and their author Ranggawarsita. In contrast, both Pigeaud (Literature of Java, 1:170-71) and Florida (Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 1:154-72) list numerous editions of these texts, showing that Javanese considered them important enough to copy and recopy over many decades. Florida’s listings, drawn as they are from extant manuscripts in collections in Java rather than Leiden, are the most authoritative source for the influence of these texts. Despite the Dutch reaction, the Pustaka Raja texts were printed in a variety of editions, and they lived on in the world of the shadow theatre as “the” authoritative texts that both validated and enriched shadow play traditions. Javanese intellectuals and puppeteers came to consider Pustaka Raja texts to be the major source (babon) of shadow theatre plays by the first decades of the twentieth century. Poerwoto Prawirohardjo, “Kesoesasteraan Indonesia Djawa,” Poedjangga Baroe 1, nos. 6, 7-12 (1933-34). Contemporary puppeteers from Solo and the surrounding villages, familiar with modern educational priorities, assert that the stories they perform are recorded in these great texts—most of whose extant versions live in palace libraries—although many puppeteers may never have seen the texts. The relationship between Ranggawarsita’s Pustaka Raja Purwa and the stories of the shadow puppet theatre will be discussed in detail in chapter 4.

This struggle in colonial Java between indigenous and Dutch historical conceptions reflected the increasing Dutch need to redefine the boundaries of Javanese historical writing to fit within certain Dutch evolutionary worldviews. If the Dutch decided what was and what was not Javanese history, they were, in effect, colonizing Javanese intellectual as well as geographical domains. Shadow tales could not be history because they were obviously myths, and post-Enlightenment European scholars were engaged in a scientific project of distinguishing myth from history. Ranggawarsita’s works were dismissed because he refused to accept the colonial categories of his day. But when the shaping and writing down of Javanese Ramayana and Mahabharata traditions coincided with the rise of Dutch Ethnology, scholarly views of the connections between these stories and history began to change. In 1877, a Chair of Geography and Ethnology of the East Indian Archipelago was established at Leiden. (P. E. de Josselin de Jong, Structural Anthropology in the Netherlands: A Reader (The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1977), p. 4.) Instead of the mid-nineteenth-century dismissal of the connections between myth—as represented in the shadow theatre repertoire—and history, by the 1890s the shadow theatre came to be seen by Dutch ethnologists as a rich source of ancient “Hindu-Javanese” traditions. In her dissertation on Yogyanese wayang zoong —wayang theatre with human actors—Jennifer Lindsay suggests that the evolutionary and racialist thinking of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries made the Dutch scholars appreciate “pure” traditions more than syncretic ones. In the world of music that Lindsay describes, this meant that the Javanese gamelan would be valued more highly than the Portuguese-influenced kroncong music popular in Batavia, especially among Eurasians. “Klasik, Kitsch or Contemporary: A Study of the Javanese Performing Arts” (Ph.D. diss., University of Sydney, 1985), p. 10. If we extend Lindsay’s argument to shadow theatre traditions, it could account for the marked Dutch preference for what they considered the trunk stories, lakon jejer, over the branch stories or lakon carangan of the repertoire. Certainly many Dutch colonial scholars deplored the Javanese deviations from what they considered to be the “authentic” Indian Ramayana and Mahabharata stories. Although Dutch scholars had reacted negatively to Ranggawarsita’s Book of Kings, a second mid-nineteenth-century text fared better in the Dutch scholarly world because it linked the shadow theatre to the Javanese courts.

The influence of the European search for origins and chronologies was evident in the Serat Sastramiruda of B.K.P. Kusumadilaga, the son of K.G.P. Adipati Arja Mangkoeboemi and grandson of Pakubuwana in. Soeharda Sastrasoewignja, in “Hal Wajang Poerwa dan Djalan-djalan oentoek Memperbaharoeinja,” Poedjangga Baroe 2, nos. 1-4 (1934-35), supplies the information on Kusumadilaga’s connections to PB in (p. 193). When I was living in Leiden in 1982, I purchased a copy of te Mechelen’s Drie-en-Twintig Schetsen van Wayang-Stukken (1879) that presumably had belonged to G.A.J. Hazeu, Dutch Adviser for Native Affairs in the early twentieth century and a scholar of Javanese wayang literature. On the front page of this book that bears Hazeu’s name is a note that says the lakon or wayang stories were originally collected by Kusumadilaga. The note also mentions that the dhalang of the lakon was named Sastramiroeda. Since 1982, I have come across several other books imprinted with Hazeu’s stamp and filled with presumably his handwritten notes. The most interesting is a copy of his dissertation, presently owned by the University of Michigan Library, that is filled with handwritten notes that seem to be plans for a revised edition of the work. I believe that these notes, in the same handwriting as the other two books I have seen, are the notes of Hazeu himself. A contributing factor to this assessment is the generally low regard bestowed upon Hazeu by the Indonesianist and Javanist scholars at Leiden. In March of 1993, I was told by Professor Hendrik Maier, Chair of Malay and Indonesian Languages at Leiden, that Hazeu was not considered important enough by Maier and A. Teeuw to include in their edited work Honderd Jaar Studie van Indonesie 1850-1950 Levensbeschrijvingen van twaalf Nederlandse onderzoekers (Den Haag: B. V. Drukkerij en Uitgoverij Smits, 1976), which gathers the obituaries of the most famous and well-respected of the Leiden scholars like Roorda, Brandes, Snouck Hurgronje, Krom, and van Vollenhoven. Hazeu snuck in anyway; he wrote the obituary for his mentor H. Kern. This text gave a supposed chronological history of the development of the wayang theatre, connecting that history with the courts by documenting the creation of new puppets by various rulers from Java’s past, and set up certain standards for the musical and poetic fragments that are woven into each performance. K.P.H. Kusumadilaga, Serat Sastramiruda (Jakarta: Proyek Penerbitan Buku Sastra Indonesia Dan Daerah, Departemen Pendidikan S Kebudayaan, 1981); a different edition of this work was first published in Bramartani 1877-78. J. J. Ras, in “The Historical Development of the Javanese Shadow Theatre,” Review of Indonesian and Malaysian Studies 10 (1976): 58-60, gives a summary of the contents of this text and its connections with historical Javanese rulers. I cite passages from the text in the next chapter. I have already shown in the previous chapter that it was not uncommon to attribute the ability to perform a shadow play to rulers of the Javanese realm, yet the surviving evidence also points to strong village traditions. Perhaps scholars need to question the vision of the development of the shadow theatre tradition that this court text portrayed.

## Kusumadilaga and Court Performance Traditions

Many Javanese written traditions are connected with the courts of Central Java, and evidence that will be presented below suggests that village traditions of the shadow theatre were not very different from the court traditions of Central Java before the twentieth century. Dutch scholars who have investigated the history of the shadow theatre and argued for a dominant court performance tradition usually relied on their own interpretations of the Sastramiruda for their information. (L. Serrurier, De Wajang Poerwa: eene ethnologische studie (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1896); G.A.J. Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Javaansche Tooneel; Th. Pigeaud, Javaanse Volksvertoningen; Ras, “The Historical Development of the Javanese Shadow Theatre”; V.M. Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang. Ras, in “The Historical Development of the Javanese Shadow Theatre,” pp. 71-72, notes that the Surakarta style of shadow theatre performance was a product of attention devoted to the performing arts at the courts of the Susuhunan and the Mangkunagaran in the nineteenth century.) The Sastramiruda, however, is a court text, and one produced for very specific purposes. The Sastramiruda was written in approximately the same period as the Pustaka Raja Purwa by a nobleman with much more elevated court connections than Ranggawarsita. If the Pustaka Raja Purwa was assumed to be fictional, why should the information in the Sastramiruda be accepted at face value? I see the writing of the Sastramiruda as an attempt by Kusumadilaga and his colleagues and friends at the court of Surakarta in the second half of the nineteenth century to satisfy Dutch scholarly standards for the future of the shadow theatre tradition and to attempt to place village performance traditions under the textual domination of the Solonese courts.

Looking at other scattered sources that document the Javanese past, there is little evidence of a preeminent court performance style, or even mention of refined court performances, before the late nineteenth century. I noted in the previous chapter that the Nagarakertagama from the fourteenth century never mentions shadow theatre performances at court. Th. Pigeaud, Java in the Fourteenth Century, vol. 4 (The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1962). The Serat Babad Nitik Mangkunagaran (1780-91), the diary of a female soldier connected to the late eighteenth-century court of Mangkunagara I, known for his devotion to Islam, briefly mentions various types of performances held at court in honor of the birthday of the prince.

>Then ringgit tiyang [was staged],  
taking turns with sarimpi dance,  
and dancers danced before the screen,  
all were petite and beautiful maidens.  
Open-mouthed with wonder was everyone watching,  
the spectators were astounded.  
Then the beautiful female bedhaya dance intervened.  
[...]  
They held entertainment all day long.  
In the late afternoon there was ringgit performance  
as well as continuous taledhekan.  
In the morning they staged ringgit once again—  
the leather puppet show. And also  
blankets were distributed to soldiers.  
At night wayang wong dance drama was performed again.  
Then in the morning there were taledhekan.

Ringgit tiyang is a wayang play performed with human actors, sarimpi and bedhaya are court dances, taledhekan are male dance parties where special women are hired to dance and flirt with men, and wayang wong is the low Javanese term for ringgit tiyang. This passage from the Serat Babad Nitik Mangkunagaran was translated by Sumarsam in chapter 1 of his Gamelan: Cultural Interaction and Musical Development in Central Java (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995). For further commentary and translations from this interesting diary of a female scribe and soldier at the court of Mangkunagararan 1, see A. Kumar, “Javanese Court Society and Politics in the Late Eighteenth Century: The Record of a Lady Soldier, Parts 1, 11,” Indonesia 29, 30(1980): 1-46, 67-111.

This passage is interesting for several reasons: it shows that even at a Javanese court known for its particular devotion to Islam, Ramayana and Mahabharata stories were frequently performed; also, it indicates that shadow theatre may not have been performed in the all-night performance style common today; lastly, shadow theatre seems to be grouped with performance traditions like taledhekan, also known as tayuban, a rowdy dance party featuring young male or female dancers for hire, that was certainly not known as high art, rather than with the more refined court dances of sarimpi and bedhaya.

In his detailed investigation of court life in Yogyakarta in the same period, the well-respected scholar of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Java M.C. Ricklefs never mentions a shadow theatre performance held at any of the Central Javanese courts. Ricklefs, Jogjakarta under Sultan Mangkubumi. In his newest work on Java in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, War, Culture and Economy in Java 1677-1726, pp. 9 and 207, Ricklefs mentions that “higher culture,” which included wayang, was known at the mid-seventeenth century court of Mataram. He bases this observation on the report of R. van Goens, who traveled to the court of Mataram five times during the years 1648-54, but he does not clarify what is meant by wayang or ringgit in this period. He also notes that a Dutch Commissioner was entertained by dance and wayang (shadow puppet) at the court of Amangkurat IV in 1723. Again, no information is given about what wayang was at that time. As usual, wayang is accepted as a stable performance genre even though many types of entertainment were grouped under the name of wayang, at least in the early nineteenth century. See below. The Serat Centhini, compiled in the early nineteenth century, describes many shadow theatre performances which take place outside of the courts, except for the Partadewa and Murwakala performances by the dhalang Pandjangmas. (Sumahatmaka, Ringkasan Centini (Jakarta: pn Balai Pustaka, 1981); personal communication from Alan Feinstein, 24 May 1995.) The attention devoted to describing these wayang performances, however, does show great interest in the shadow theatre among the writers of the text, presumably literati connected to the Kraton Solo. Carey gives the most interesting and complete information on the different types of theatrical performances held at the court of Yogyakarta in the early nineteenth century. (Carey, The Cultural Ecology of Early Nineteenth Century Java, pp. 7-11. For further descriptions of theatrical performances held in Surakarta and Yogyakarta in 1828, see “Journal of an Excursion to the Native Provinces on Java in the Year 1828, during the War with Dipo Negoro,” Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia Series 1, no. 7 (1853): 1-19, 138-58, 225-46, 358-78.) He notes that according to the Babad Ngayogyakarta, (Vol. I, XCVIII36-39, p. 401.) the most popular type of wayang performance was wayang wong, or plays with human actors, but at the wedding of Sultan Hamengkubuwana IV in 1816, three full-length wayang kulit performances were given as well as performances of wayang gedhog (Panji stories), wayang krucil (Damar Wulan stories using flat wooden puppets), wayang jemblung (Islamic Menak stories), wayang topeng (masked dance), and wayang gambyong (wooden wayang golek puppet brought out by a female dancer at the end of a wayang kulit performance). This list clearly emphasizes that the word wayang cannot be used without further qualification. Carey also reports that when the widow of Sultan Hamengkubuwana IV was ill in 1825, she stayed awake and read wayang stories for two nights. Although Carey notes that many court figures would try to perform as dhalang, he suggests the best dhalang often came from the villages. Carey, Cultural Ecology of Early Nineteenth Century Java, p. 10; Carey, “The Role of Wayang in the Dipanagara War.” Carey, in Cultural Ecology, p. 10, discusses the passion of Sunan Pakubuwana in (1788-1820) for both wayang kulit and wayang wong and how he would sometimes perform as a dhalang himself or encourage family members to dance wayang topeng. T.E. Behrend, in “The Serat Jatiswara: Structure and Change in a Javanese Poem 1600-1930” (Ph.D. diss., Australian National University, 1987), pp. 258-59, notes that Pakubuwana IV, who ruled in the early nineteenth century, is credited with being interested in wayang of all sorts and writing wayang gedhog lakon. He also refers to the collection of titles of lakon produced by Redi Tanaya, a dhalang connected to the courts. Florida, in Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 1:217, also mentions Pakubuwana IV’S inclination to perform as a dhalang. She notes an early nineteenth-century collection of wayang purwa plays that were supposedly used by this ruler. On the other hand, Florida also notes (p. 26) that a handful of manuscripts, mostly summaries of wayang stories, in the collection of the Kraton Surakarta are signed by village dhalang. There seems to be a legacy from Hayam Wuruk in the fourteenth century through Pakubuwana IV in the early nineteenth century and up to Soekarno in the twentieth century of the rulers of Java enhancing their reputations and power by showing off their skills with the puppets.

The courts of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries certainly had their own collections of wayang puppets, but these puppets were only supposed to be used by the rulers of the realm. Raffles, History of Java; Ricklefs, Jogjakarta under Sultan Mangkubumi. See previous note about rulers using court puppet collections, as well as discussions by Soeharda Sastrasoewignja below. From the available evidence, one might conclude that before the Dutch broke the power of the Javanese elites after the Java War, the noble families retained the services of puppeteers in the areas of Central Java under their control. Since these nobles owed allegiance to the Sultans and Sunans of Central Java, they might be required on occasion to provide the courts with entertainments as well as to entertain in their homes. The puppeteers thus relied on local elites as patrons, and it was the transfer of this patronage to the courts in the late nineteenth century that I am suggesting. Poensen’s discussion of the dhalang of his day seems to corroborate this idea. He notes the type of services expected from the puppeteers and payments or tax concessions made by the native chiefs to their dhalang, in “De Wajang,” pp. 204-15. The courts also had special ranks of puppeteers (panakawan kothak) who aired (ngisis) the puppets once every thirty-five days. The Solonese author/ journalist/publisher R. Tanaya recounts his father’s disappointment at being given the rank of dhalang kesepuhan (the king’s puppeteer) rather than that of panewu (someone with authority over village leaders) in the 1880s. (Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang, pp. 84-85.) The rank of panewu was one of the highest held by dhalang at the end of the nineteenth century, and dhalang who held this rank generally received a tax-free grant of land, an appanage, or, after the first decade of the twentieth century, a salary from the court. (This information comes from Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang; Augusta De Wit, Java: Facts and Fancies (1912; Singapore: Oxford University Press, 1987); and a personal communication on 19 April 1993 from ethnomusicologist Marc Perlman, a specialist on Central Javanese gamelan and wayang traditions.)

Although some of these dhalang with ranks at the court may have preserved and transmitted oral and written traditions connected with the shadow theatre, and cared for the court puppet collections, it is unclear whether they were also skilled performers. Court texts often speak of dhalang, but some of those called dhalang were dance masters, and even those who received appanages or salaries came originally from the villages to serve at the courts. Pigeaud, Javaanse Volksvertoningen, p. 493; Holt, Art in Indonesia, p. 289; Sumarsam, “Historical Contexts and Theories of Javanese Music” (Ph.D. diss., Cornell University, 1992), p.51 n.53; Florida, Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 7:26. Both Pigeaud, Javaanse Volksvertoningen, p. 58, and Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang, p. 89, discusses a passage in Adatrechtbundel 23 from 1924 that mentions a royal decree given to six types of occupations in Yogyakarta allowing these people to levy a trade tax on other members of their respective trades. The trades mentioned were dyer, tempe (soybean cake) maker, potter, smith, tandak (female dancer) master, and dhalang. These craftspeople are said to have had the title of lurah, a leader or chief of the trades, with attachments to the royal court. Clara van Groenendael mentions a village puppeteer who was called (ditimbali) to the court in 1946 to care for the court wayang puppets, which were still believed to be very powerful (angker, bobot). (Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang, p. 80.) In Java in the 1980s, the court servant who aired the puppets was a dhalang, but he could not perform very well; his home, in his words, was located in the plosok (rural area), right outside the city. The other Solonese dhalang connected to the Kraton Solo in the 1980s was Anom Suroto. Suroto’s popularity among audiences in Central Java and Jakarta made him eligible to be a court dhalang, although he, too, hailed from a village area outside Solo. In this same way, in the past, famous puppeteers from the villages would be called to the courts as the courts displayed and tapped the power of the puppeteers, and the reputations of the puppeteers would be enhanced through their association with the courts.

In a series of articles published in the prominent Indies Malay literary journal Poedjangga Baroe in 1934 and 1935, Soeharda Sastrasoewignja recorded the accepted wisdom of the day about the transmission and development of the wayang purwa tradition in the nineteenth century. The information in the following paragraphs comes from Soeharda Sastrasoewignja, “Hal Wajang Poerwa,” Poedjangga Baroe 2, no. 7 (Januari 1935): 193-96. Soe-harda’s knowledge is based on a familiarity with Dutch sources, in particular the work of Hazeu and Rassers, as well as with Javanese sources. He states that K.G. Boeminata, the younger brother of Pakubuwana IV (r. 1788-1820), was in charge of all the arts in the Kraton Solo from the end of the reign of PB IV into that of PB VII (r. 1830-58). Boeminata was known as an expert on wayang theatre, gamelan music, and dance. He commissioned two kotak (sets) of wayang puppets for the court, the famous Kyai Djimat set of wayang kulit puppets and the Kyai Dewakatong set of wayang gedhog puppets. These are the sets of puppets cared for to this day by the court dhalang. These puppets are considered very sacred and powerful and are never used because only the ruler is powerful enough to perform with them. According to Soeharda, they were last used by Pakubuwana IV.

Soeharda says that all of Boeminata’s knowledge was given to Kusumadilaga, who by these calculations would have been in charge of kraton arts from the death of Boeminata in 1833 until the reign of PB IX (r. 1861-93). Kusumadilaga supposedly liked to give performances at the kraton and the Mangkunagaran, especially the court of MN IV. Soeharda, in “Hal Wajang Poerwa,” p. 195, notes that Kusumadilaga was a dhalang in addition to being a poedjangga, court poet or writer. But when Soeharda discusses Kyai Redisoeta, he calls him “a real dhalang” (seorang dalang jang soenggoeh-soenggoehnja), and records that he was responsible for putting together the story of the lakon Irawan Rabi (The Marriage of Irawan), which Soeharda says was published by the Bale Poetaka, although the dhalang was illiterate (cf. Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang, pp. 85-87). In contrast, Kusumadilaga was a writer and an adapter of the tradition but not a dhalang who performed for compensation. Soeharda states that it was Kusumadilaga who standardized the content of wayang kulit performances that lasted for a whole night (semalam suntuk).

He arranged the one night style of wayang performance, fitting together its parts with the musical pieces (gendhing), the mood songs (ada-ada) and the rest of the songs. Although the arrangement and the sequencing were not yet complete, they still remain the basis of the pattern of a lakon, just like what is taught at the Dhalang School at the Sriwedari Museum in Solo. (Soeharda Sastrasoewignja, “Hal Wajang Poerwa,” p. 193.)

Soeharda goes on to explain that when Kusumadilaga was very old, a man came from the Mangkunagaran court and asked him for all his knowledge—”interviewed him as people say today” (“menginterview, kata orang sekarang”)—about wayang and gamelan. Finally all the knowledge was eventually reshaped for publication and was published in the Solonese newspaper Bramartani in 1877 and 1878. The transmission of the knowledge was completed when it all finally appeared in 1930 as a book called the Serat Sastramiruda, which has become the “kor’an” for all the dhalang of Surakarta and the surrounding areas. Soeharda’s discussion is very useful as an understanding of received wisdom about the history of the tradition as told by a Dutch-educated Javanese intellectual in the 1930s. Day, in “Meanings of Change in the Poetry of Nineteenth-century Java,” pp. 178-83, interprets the ascendance of Boeminata in the artistic affairs of the Kraton Solo as a kind of turning point in the rise of conservative, Dutch-influenced factions in court politics, particularly when the Dutch placed Pangeran Purbaya on the throne in 1830, after the Java War. For sensitive recountings of the fall of PB VI and his replacement by PB VII, see Florida’s Writing the Past, Inscribing the Future, as well as Day, “Meanings of Change.” For different descriptions of the Sastramiruda, see Ras, “The Historical Development of the Javanese Shadow Theatre,” and Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang. Considering the often volatile relations between the Dutch government and members of the Solonese courts throughout the nineteenth century, the Serat Sastramiruda can be seen as part of the Dutch and Javanese struggle to control Javanese literary arts in the late nineteenth century.

The Serat Sastramiruda was acceptable to the Dutch scholars of the latter part of the nineteenth century because it did not contest colonial intellectual categories in the way that Ranggawarsita’s work did. Rather than attempting to prove the popularly held belief that the wayang tales were indeed a type of Javanese history, the Sastramiruda gave rules and definitions. Like the Serat Centhini and even the Eurasian language teacher C.F. Winter’s Javaansche Zamenspraken (1862), in which a Dutch scholar named Tuan Anu or Mr. So-and-So questions a native informant named Gunawan about the literature and customs of Java, the text uses a question and answer technique. Even more interesting, a telling of the lakon Palasara that is included as the second part of the Sastramiruda is one of the three lakon that was annotated and published in Holland by Roorda in 1869; it was then freely translated into Dutch by Poensen in 1872 and summarized in Javanese script by te Mechelen in 1879. See also Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Javaansche Tooneel, pp. 156-68, where he attempts to explain the history of the story of Palasara by comparing the text of Roorda and the pakem (summary) of Ch. te Mechelen, “Drie-en-twintig schetsen van wajangstukken (Lakon’s) gebruikelijk bij de vertooningen der Wajang-Poerwa op Java,” Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap voor Kunsten en Wetenschappen 40 (1879): 1-437, no. 5 of the 23, with a Sanskrit text of the Mahabharata from Calcutta dated 1834 and a Balinese manuscript found by H. Kern. It is quite useful to look at the opening question posed by Sastramiruda to Kusumadilaga in the text.

>First please explain who it was who created the _wayang purwa_, and from whence comes the custom of ear-piercing for both male and female puppets? And how was the name wayang purwa determined? Kusumadilaga, Serat Sastramiruda, pp. 12 and 158. Ibid., pp. 51-52 and 187-88.

Here are two very sweeping questions with a seemingly trivial question sandwiched in between. The questioner Sastramiruda wants to know who created the wayang and how it received its name. These seem fitting questions to open a manual that is going to lay out the conventions and the history of the shadow theatre and discuss other Central Javanese theatrical traditions as well. But why the non sequitur about earrings? The significance of the question emerges in its answer. Both male and female puppets have pierced ears because King Jayabhaya, the supposed creator of the wayang kulit puppets, took as his model the statues (arca) of Indian-influenced art that displayed clothing styles and jewelry of people from India (wong bangsa Hindhu), thus reconstructing and confirming the association of the shadow theatre with “Hindu-Javanese” plastic arts and literature.

The Serat Sastramiruda, in elaborating the rules or the proscriptions for courtly wayang performances, seemed opportunely to respond to many of the Dutch criticisms of the wayang described below. (Ibid., pp. 51-52 and 187-88.) One of the rules stated that dhalang should not make lewd jokes (_aja bebanyolan ingkang lekoh_) and they should not bore their audiences. Since raunchy humor is the staple of many performances, these rules seem quite contradictory. Several other “rules” that responded to Dutch criticisms include admonitions to the dhalang to understand the Kawi words of the suluk or mood songs, to be familiar with written texts containing wayang lore, and not to change the stories or the order of the stories. One of Winter’s criticisms of the dhalang in his above-mentioned Javaansche Zamenspraken, 3d ed., vol. 1 (Amsterdam: Muller, 1862), p. 152, was that they failed to understand the words of their suluk or mood songs, which were usually taken from Old Javanese poetry. As I note in chapter 4, these rules seem not only foreign to the ways in which the puppeteers themselves talk about their traditions, but even inimical to them.

That the Serat Sastramiruda, like Ranggawarsita’s Book of Kings, was merely the product of its time and not an ancient Javanese text did not seem to trouble the Dutch scholarly community of the late nineteenth century. Even though the Sastramiruda dated the puppets by using Ranggawarsita’s Javanese chronogram-riddles (candra sengkala), the text satisfied the Dutch scholarly search for “authenticity” because it dated the puppets rather than treating the myths as historical events. The Sastramiruda also served a useful purpose in perpetuating the Dutch myth of Hindu-Javanese decadence. It recorded the rules that the puppeteers supposedly had forgotten or continually bungled; if the puppeteers followed the rules, the shadow theatre could be returned to its former glory.

To understand this text in the context of later nineteenth-century Javanese society, we might view the writing of it as an attempt by the Solonese courts to tap the power of village puppeteers and to begin the process of reconstructing the shadow theatre tradition that would continue into the twentieth century and culminate in the 1920s with the opening of the court schools for puppeteers. Puppeteers were known for their command of the unseen forces of nature through knowledge of mystical formulas (like the sastrajendra discussed in the preceding chapter) and were often called to the courts to commemorate auspicious occasions. By the second half of the nineteenth century, Dutch control had deprived the courts of all their military functions, and most of their political ones, and had directed their energies to elaborate weddings and the cultivation of artistic traditions. (Cf. Day, “Meanings of Change in the Poetry of Nineteenth-century Java”; Pemberton, On the Subject of “Jam.”) The new Dutch scholarly interests, activities, and aesthetic preferences gave these artistic endeavors additional prestige in the final decades of the century.

## Nineteenth-Century Dutch Descriptions of Javanese Shadow Theatre

Although quite a number of Dutch scholars began expressing their views on the shadow theatre by the mid-nineteenth century, few of them had actually been to Java to witness a shadow play. Hazeu wrote his famous study of the origins of the wayang before he ever set foot in Java—although he subsequently spent twenty years there; Roorda never went to Java; Serrurier never went to Java; and although H. Kern was born in Java, his major time in Asia as an adult was spent in India, where he lived for two years. Several of the Dutchmen who actually saw and described the Javanese shadow theatre in the latter part of the nineteenth century were either civil servants like H.C. Humme or missionaries like C. Poensen. Fasseur, in De Indologen, p. 225, notes that both Humme and Poensen were employed in the docentenkorps at Delft as language teachers after their return from the Indies. Ch. te Mechelen was another important nineteenth-century observer of wayang theatre whose ideas are discussed in chapter 4. He is not mentioned in Fasseur’s De Indologen, but he seems to have been an independent scholar of Javanese literary arts. But many Dutch scholars felt qualified to comment on the art form that they had never seen. Taco Roorda, for instance, gained his information about Javanese wayang from the Eurasians Winter and Wilkens, mentioned above, and from his missionary colleague Gericke. Roorda prefaced his Javanese text of three wayang stories with the following opinion:

>For knowledge of the language as well as of the morals and beliefs of the Javanese folk the wajang stories are surely to be considered of very great interest. The subject of those stories, though, cannot keep the interest of us Europeans, and neither can we find pleasure in the usually insipid and obscene jokes by which the dhalang seeks to provoke a laugh from his listeners; but the language that the dhalang himself speaks, and the conversations that he has his characters carry on, are a rich source for Javanese language and ethnology.  
- T. Roorda, “De lotgevallen van Raden Pandji, volgens de Javaansche wajangverhalen,” Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië, Niewe Serie, 1863:1-65.1 obtained this passage of Taco Roorda from Poensen, “De Wajang,” pp. 160-61, where he quotes several passages from Taco Roorda and other scholars. Although Poensen gives the citation Roorda, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, Niewe Serie, 1863: 1-65, as the source of this quote, I found a slightly different passage in Roorda’s “De Lotgevallen van Raden Pandji, volgens de Javaansche wajang verhalen,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, zevende deel (1864): 1-65, at p. 65: “Nobody would attribute aesthetic value to it [the Pandji story] because it appears too unnatural, but it is a contribution to the knowledge of the content and purpose of wajang stories, about which people may ask if these [stories] fulfill the role of our theatre for the Javanese or are just puppet shows, and even then puppet shows for grown-up people for whom the most important thing is sensual pleasure.”

The missionary Poensen quoted the earlier writings of both Roorda and Wilkens in his interesting study of 1872-73. (Poensen, “De Wajang,” pp. 160-61.) Poensen’s opinions about the wayang, based as they were on several years in Java, are particularly useful for gaining an understanding of the workings of wayang traditions in the 1860s and 1870s. Although stationed in Kedhiri in East Java, Poensen was familiar with court and urban as well as village puppeteers and had read much of the available literature of the shadow theatre in both Dutch and Javanese. Unfortunately, Poensen’s opinion of the wayang purwa plays he came to know quite well was not very high.

>And we cannot but regret how, especially in the desa [villages], the dhalang in general think much too little of this [serious] sort of listeners, and for them and others their recitations are not organized enough; indeed, on the contrary, are way more trivial than serious, insipid and vapid instead of witty and true, and already have fallen far beneath the standards of decency and delicacy. It’s also a pity that they [the puppeteers] are not developed or educated enough to study and rework the available materials in such a way that their recitations get more real poetic value, more pleasing coherence and variety of expression. The wajang could become a strong and suitable means of refinement and aesthetic cultivation; now however, for many, they do more harm than good. (Ibid., pp. 152-53.)

Poensen continued:

>And look, too, at the prominent lack indicated in those speeches of the dhalang. That exaggeration appears in the fables can be forgiven; that impossibilities happen in them is still bearable, but that the art does not exert any efforts in order to communicate spirit, learning, truth, and naturalness to all; portrays its images without nobility or grace and remains estranged from real and pure poetic representation [...] all of this makes us seek neither aesthetic pleasure nor knowledge in these dramas and regret that they contain no incentives or stimulus even for the people themselves. See, after we have come to learn about the people, all this does not surprise us; the contrary would surprise us much more. Surely the wajang also could be a genuine mirroring of the spiritual life of the people, a people without history, insofar as that history has not been written down. (Ibid., pp. 155-56.)

The fact that the Javanese had no written history seemed to be a problem for Poensen, but he acknowledged that they might have had a history which had not yet been written. Poensen even defended the Javanese for their belief that their history was, in fact, told through the shadow theatre tradition and argued that the wayang should be of interest even for Dutch writers of Javanese history.

>But our credulous native shall indeed not apply [any] critique to them [the stories]. How could all the histories not be truthful? Are they not written down? Are they not told as much in the princely palace as by the lowliest of the King’s subjects? And did not father and grandfather know how to tell them in the same way as they are still being recited today? And why would we begrudge the Javanese for allowing themselves to be thrilled by the miraculous? (Ibid., pp. 161-62.)

Poensen then discussed the significance of the plays for patrons and audiences and came to the somewhat startling conclusion that somehow the Javanese had managed to combine their belief in the wayang theatre with their religious observances as Muslims.

>If the wajang-party is a pleasing entertainment for the guest, for the host it usually has a deeper and more serious meaning. The reader, who is quite familiar with the position of people at about the same level of civilization as the Javanese, will not be surprised if we draw his attention to how religious consciousness, or if people prefer, superstition, has also gained control of this play, and how holding a wajang performance is viewed as a religious, or rather a pious action.

Poensen admitted after spending years in Java that the Javanese really were Muslims and unlikely to convert to Christianity, although he never believed that Islam could satisfy the real needs of the human soul. (Steenbrink, Dutch Colonialism and Indonesian Islam, p. 103.) He was thus conflicted in his opinions about Javanese Islam. On the one hand he stated:

>The Javanese are all (with an unimportant exception) Mohammedans. This is what the government says and what the natives themselves say, as well as what reality teaches us [...] and the pesantren and the pilgrimage are continually spreading a better understanding of the true spirit and the essence of the [sic] Islam....

Then a few sentences later he qualified these views:

>And although they [the masses] continue to live in stupidity, heresy, and poverty, they in fact know, especially in the eastern and southern parts of the island, little more about Islam than the circumcision of the children, fasting, not to eat pork....

But then he returned to his prescient main point:

>But all this ignorance and foolishness will gradually diminish, and this is already to be noticed in some classes. The result will be that the masses will become stronger in their Islamic beliefs and its teachings will be better known. In short, the people will become better Mohammedans.  
- These last three quotes on Javanese Islam come from Brieven over den Islam uit de binnenlanden van Java (Leiden: Brill, 1886, pp. 2-8, 13-17), as excerpted in Indonesia: Selected Documents on Colonialism and Nationalism, ed. and trans, by Chr. L. M. Penders (St. Lucia, Queensland: University of Queensland Press, 1977), pp. 242-43.

Poensen was, in fact, one of the first scholars to document the distinction which he found the Javanese to draw between bangsa poetihan and bangsa abangan, the white and red groups of Javanese Muslims, an idea that would be expanded and popularized in American scholarship in the 1960s by Clifford Geertz. (Geertz, Religion of Java. The “bangsa poetihan” were what Geertz called santri or orthodox Muslims, and the “bangsa abangan” were the so-called nominal Muslims.) Poensen drew a second distinction between the formal or outer life of a people and their inner soul, itself a very Islamic idea. The Dutch in Holland were Christian both inwardly and outwardly, but the Javanese were only Islamic outwardly while their inner soul was really concerned with calling on nature spirits for protection. Even the orthodoxy of the so-called bangsa poetihan could be questioned, according to Poensen.

If Poensen’s data came from Central and East Java, Humme’s work on the wayang comes from the western part of Central Java known as Banyumas, or possibly from the western pasisir region of Tegal. (Cf. Ras, “The Historical Development of the Javanese Shadow Theatre,” p. 70 n. 28; Ras calls it a West Javanese pasisir-style lakon. H.C. Humme, in Abiåså: Een Javaansch Tooneelstuk, (Wajang), (’s Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1878), p. IV, states that because of the pronunciation of the “a” sound, he believes the text is either from Banyumas or Tegal.) As a civil servant rather than a scholar, Humme was very apologetic about his translation of the shadow play Abiasa that he had been encouraged to undertake by H. Kern. Professor of Sanskrit and Javanese at Leiden, Kern found the manuscript in the Leiden archives and gave it to Humme to work on after the latter returned from his service with the administrative corps in the 1870s with a good command of Javanese. (Humme, Abiasa: Eenjavaansch Tooneelstuk, (Wajang), p. iii.)

I referred above to Ranggawarsita’s dilemma: he seemed to be doing what the Dutch scholars around him were doing in his attempt to chronicle the wayang stories, but his work was rejected as inauthentic. Yet the choice of lakon for documentation and translation in the latter part of the nineteenth century shows how several Dutch scholars seemed intent upon putting the “chaos of Javanese literature” into some proper order—in fact, into a proper Indian order. As chapter 4 will show, the boundaries between what came to be known as lakon pokok or lakon jejer, trunk stories, and lakon carangan, branch stories, were flexible and porous. In Dutch scholarly eyes, however, lakon pokok were usually the stories most closely connected to Indian tellings of the Mahabharata tales. These also were the stories that the Dutch scholars translated and favored. Dutch frustrations over the Javanese lack of interest in these trunk stories became a fairly consistent theme in Dutch writings on wayang from the late nineteenth century into the twentieth century.

Looking at the lists of lakon compiled at the Kraton Solo in the early nineteenth century, (Florida, Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 1:216-20.) one sees that there is a varied selection of lakon, only a few of which could be designated as trunk stories if I were to accept, for the moment, a definition of trunk stories as those stories closest to Indian tellings of the tales. But in turning to the nineteenth-century Dutch scholarship on the wayang repertoire, it is significant that Roorda chose to publish the Javanese text of the lakon Palasara, mentioned above in the discussion of the Sastramiruda, because it told the story of the founding of the kingdom of Ngastina, setting the historical stage for the events that unfold in the Mahabharata stories. T. Roorda, De wajang verhalen van Pala-Sara, Pandoe en Raden Pandji, in het Javaansch, Met aanteekeningen (’s Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1869). In Hazeu’s dissertation of 1897, he also chose to devote 34 of roughly 190 pages of his text to a summary and discussion of the lakon Palasara, following the method put forward by his major professor H. Kern in the latter’s “Eene Indische sage in Javaansche gewaad,” for comparing Javanese tellings to their Indian “originals.” It would seem to be no coincidence that Kern chose the lakon Abiasa for Humme to translate since this story follows the story of Palasara in the “historical” progression of tales. And Humme mentioned this in the notes that follow his Javanese text. (Humme, Abiåså: Een Javaansch Tooneelstuk, (Wajang), p. 77.)

Cohen Stuart’s reluctantly offered translation of the Modern Javanese Serat Bratayuda in 1860, distasteful as it was to him, ultimately showed just how far the Javanese had degenerated from the “correct” tellings of the stories found in Indian or possibly in Old Javanese texts. Clara van Groenendael, in Wayang Theatre in Indonesia: An Annotated Bibliography, p. 12, notes that Cohen Stuart began the tradition of comparing Javanese copies to Indian “originals” that was to continue for half a century. Although Brandes had argued against an Indian origin of the wayang, Hazeu, who reiterated many of Brandes’ s ideas, was the one who attempted to rehabilitate the shadow theatre tradition by focusing attention on Javanese creativity, although he, too, recognized the degeneration of the tradition. J.L. A. Brandes, “Een Jayapattra of Acte van een Rechterlijke Uitspraak van Caka 849,” Tijdschrift voor Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde 32 (1889): 123-24; Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Javaansche Tooneel. His work was to be widely quoted by Javanese nationalists in the early twentieth century. But Humme, too, who had lived in Java, showed a strong appreciation of the extant tradition.

The Wajang remains within the circles of the familiar traditions because the strange and fantastic characters and their actions continue to enthrall and attract the public. [The Dalang] takes, therefore, an episode or a fragment from favorite fantasy-stories as the basis of his performance, observing the main traits of the most important characters and the main features of the important happenings, and then takes the freedom to embroider them a bit. Many Dalang faithfully follow what they have seen and heard from their colleagues or read themselves in Lakon. This perhaps is more a result of a lack of spirit and inventiveness than from conscientiousness.(Humme, Abiåså: Een Javaansch Tooneelstuk, (Wajang), p. 88.)

He finally concluded on a positive but somewhat defensive note:

>But that is exactly why I find the study of the Wajang so useful, because they introduce to us, besides the wealth of language patterns and unique expressions, the taste of the Javanese people through the poetic, humorous, and coarse fantasies of the Dalang.

>People should not be too precise in their judgment of the Wajang’s absurdities and contradictions: those really don’t mean very much to the Dalang.

To balance this brief summary of nineteenth-century Dutch discourses on the shadow theatre, I conclude this chapter by turning to material collected from several older Solonese puppeteers in interviews carried out in the early 1980s. The interviews again suggest that there were few differences between court and village shadow theatre performances before the late nineteenth century.

## Javanese Memories of Older Shadow Theatre Traditions

Dutch interest in Ramayana and Mahabharata traditions—and criticism of Javanese written and performed versions of the stories—may have inspired the Javanese elites to refine or rework these traditions, or the nineteenth-century interest in shadow theatre traditions might be a continuation of interest shown by the Sultans and Sunans in both earlier and later times. Florida, Javanese Literature in Surakarta Manuscripts, 1:220, notes that B.K.P.H. Hadiwijaya, a son of Pakubuwana X, ordered a village puppeteer named Ki Gondawarsana from Ceper to write prose epitomes of fifteen wayang stories in 1928. In this same period, Mangkunagara VII both collected wayang stories and then distributed illustrated summaries of the stories in the villages. I mentioned above that in the mid-nineteenth century, Ranggawarsita and C.F. Winter were said to have collected stories from village puppeteers. This point was mentioned in several conversations with the late puppeteer and scholar R. Soetrisna in 1983 and 1984. It was not until the early twentieth century that some Dutch-educated Javanese nationalists accepted nineteenth-century Dutch attitudes toward the shadow theatre tradition—that the tradition was degenerate and needed to be upgraded. From their attendance at the new court schools in the twentieth century, we can see that puppeteers, too, came to accept these beliefs. While both the Pustaka Raja Purwa and the Serat Sastramiruda were written in the Solonese courts, data derived from oral interviews with older Javanese puppeteers in 1983 and 1984 suggest that the effects of these texts were not limited to or solely intended for the domain of the courts. Puppeteers who had been connected with the courts in the early twentieth century, and who were heirs to oral testimonies about the late nineteenth century from older family members, paint a picture of frequent interaction between court and village puppeteers during this period. The village puppeteers were also subject to the authority of Kusumadilaga and his ideas for upgrading wayang.

Nyi Kenyacarita, who was in her eighties when I was in Java in 1982-84, had been a court dhalang in her youth. She had been summoned (ditimbali) to the court by Pakubuwana X (r. 1893-1939). Because she was clever, witty, attractive, and female, she was popular at the court and took part in the preparation of lakon for court performances. She described the relationship between village dhalang and the courts in the late nineteenth century as she had heard about it from her grandparents. She begins by describing how ordinary wayang stories were prepared for court consumption.

>If something was not refined enough, not good enough, it was built up. Certain parts were decreased and others were supplemented. We were told to create stories. [...] [T]he type of stories from Pakubuwana IX ’s time were developed in the days of Pakubuwana X. The inferior stories were discarded and the good stories were increased. [...] In the old days, originally it was Penjenengan Dalem Gusti Kanjeng Kusumadilaga who gathered the dhalang. On the first day of the month of Sura, dhalang were called from near and far, from far and near. They were summoned and invited to a discussion, to analyze a set of stories one by one. This is what Sakri is like, Arjuna is like this, Salya is like that [...] once a year. Then afterwards they would walk home to eat and then come back to listen again, to listen to them again, then they would take another break. There was the expression “kembul nadhah” when Kusumadilaga would eat with the simple folk (wong cilik), with the dhalang. Then when the celebration of the first of Sura was over, those who lived far away would be given some money for their trip home, those who lived close would only get a little money.

My companion, her grandson, pressed her to explain where the dhalang had come from. She replied that there were some from as far away as Banyumas and East Java, as well as those from Yogyakarta and Central Java. She said they would all get together to exchange their knowledge so that they could make their stories better. They would discuss their tellings of the stories. Then she said it was her grandfather who had been summoned to such a session. Soeharda Sastrasoewignja, in “Hal Wajang Poerwa,” pp. 46-51, supports this argument in his discussion of shadow theatre history. Although he divides performance styles into three groups in the 1930s—padalangan keraton, padalangan dalam kota, and padalangan diloear kota (palace puppeteering, city puppeteering, and puppeteering outside the city), with the first two groups being almost indistinguishable—for the nineteenth century he notes that there was almost no difference between court wayang and village wayang.

I asked other dhalang familiar with court life if village puppeteers were ever called to the courts. R. Soetrisna from the village area of Klathen, between Solo and Yogya, who was also a teacher at the Academy in Solo, replied that in the 1930s and 1940s there were court dhalang and that dhalang were also called from the villages. Soetrisna, interview, 18 April 1984. Familiar with much of the Dutch scholarship on wayang, he said that the tradition developed simultaneously in both places, and that there were good court puppeteers and good village puppeteers (“Dados perkembangan menika janipun sareng; dados kraton gadhah dhalang sae, ing jawi ugi sampun wonten dhalang sae-sae”). I asked if wayang was a folk art or a court art. He replied that according to history (manut sejarah), it was a court art first, although it developed together in both domains. He said there was really only one tradition (“Ning carane siji”). Then Bambang Murtiyasa, an astute instructor from the Academy, said, “According to the manipulations of the historians, it was a court art first because nothing really esteemed could have developed among the people, and because the people who wrote history were from the courts.”

We asked the court teacher R. Ng. Samsudjin Probohardjono whether village dhalang were punished for performing so-called court lakon outside the court. (Interview, 3 May 1984.) He replied, “There are no writings and I have never heard of [anyone] being punished because this was not really important in the politics of the court authorities. [...] But, if someone criticized the court, this certainly could be punished. If someone made up a wayang play about a really bad king, this could also [be punished] but I have never heard or read of a village dhalang performing a story that was unusual and being punished.” We also asked him if village dhalang were called to the courts. He replied that many were, especially if they were famous in the villages. They would be called to the courts and sometimes they would become court dhalang.

The information above suggests frequent interaction between court and village traditions in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. (Cf. Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang, p. 92.) Famous village puppeteers would perform at the courts, bringing what they learned at court back to the villages, for even the court dhalang did not live at the courts. The informants indicate that by the second quarter of the twentieth century there were good puppeteers in both the courts and the villages; often those considered to be good puppeteers moved between the courts and their homes in the villages. The image arises from the interviews of an incorporation of village traditions by the courts and an attempt to smooth out the village performances, to develop them and make them better. But as Soetrisna noted above, there was only one (performance) tradition. Pigeaud, who lived in Java in the 1920s and 1930s, speaks of a “nivellerende invloed” or leveling influence wherein folk traditions were refined in the courts and these refined styles spread back to the villages. Javaanse Volksvertoningen, p. 32. He argues for seeing Javanese culture as a whole and argues against drawing sharp distinctions between folk and court traditions. He attributes such distinctions to the imposition of Western intellectualism and Islamic orthodoxy, both coming from outside Java, on indigenous Javanese traditions. In the 1920s and especially the 1930s, however, certain mystical wayang lakon probably had esoteric versions reserved for courtly consumption. It is possible that such renderings would not have been well received in the villages, but also that the court authorities did not want these powerful stories to be performed outside the courts as their magical effects may have been thought to be too dangerous. According to the late R. Ng. Martopangrawit (interview, 1983), one such story may have been the lakon Semar Kuning, which contained ilmu pengasihan or mystical love-magic. This story was also performed outside the courts, according to other puppeteers, but there may have been a special courtly performance style. See also R. A. Sutton, “Change and Ambiguity: Gamelan Style and Regional Identity in Jogjakarta,” and P. Choy, “Texts through Time: The Golek Dance of Java,” both in Aesthetic Tradition and Cultural Transmission in Java and Bali, ed. S. Morgan and L. J. Sears, Wisconsin Monographs on Southeast Asia, no. 2 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Southeast Asia Publications, 1984); they discuss the interaction of court and folk traditions in Javanese music and dance.

## Reflections

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, new ideas and new texts were being cultivated in Java that could replace the fading associations of the shadow theatre with the poetic traditions of ancient Java. The codification of shadow theatre traditions in the second half of the nineteenth century, as the Dutch scholars documented more and more of the repertoire, can be seen as an attempt at canon formation for the art of shadow puppeteering. (This observation was suggested to me in November 1994 by Professor Hendrik Maier, Chair of Indonesian and Malay at the State University of Leiden.) But the attempt to impose this canon formally upon the performers of the wayang tradition by Dutch-educated Javanese nationalists and their Dutch supporters throughout the first half of the twentieth century had unpredictable results. The puppeteers gained access to these new styles and standards through the medium of court schools nurtured by Dutch Ethici in the 1920s. However, as I argue in later chapters, the puppeteers did not always find these new styles useful or usable.

Clara van Groenendael, in 1986, preserved the Dutch scholarly view of the village puppeteers.

>The lack of education of many popular dalangs, and as a result their unfamiliarity with the archaic poetic language (kawi), from which the language of the dalang (basa padhalangan) has borrowed a great many elements, had given rise in time to tremendous corruption of the expressions used by the dalang, as well as to all kinds of fantastic explanations of wrongly understood words and phrases.  
- Clara van Groenendael, The dalang behind the wayang , p. 32.

She believes that the shadow theatre was an elite tradition that became corrupted as it was let out of the courts in the first decades of the twentieth century. I am arguing that shadow theatre was always a vital village tradition that was refined in the 1920s and 1930s in response to criticisms of the tradition by Javanese nationalists and Dutch scholar-administrators and then posited as the essence of a lost high culture.

The Pustaka Raja Purwa of Ranggawarsita and the Serat Sastramiruda of Kusumadilaga, written under the early influence of Dutch scholarly efforts to document the tradition, fulfilled the need for written texts that could set standards for the tradition even though one text was embraced and one ignored by many Dutch aficionados of the wayang. As the next chapter shows, the emerging Javanese intelligentsia in the twentieth century, who had the benefit of a Dutch-language education, decided to combine the techniques of European modernity and the vigor of village performance styles to “regenerate” Javanese shadow theatre and the Ramayana and Mahabharata stories it conveyed.

As the first generations of soon-to-be Indies nationalists gained a Dutch-language education in the early twentieth century, they became more conscious of the gulf that separated them from the peasantry at the same time that they realized they needed the support of the peasantry in order to overthrow the Dutch regime. It is in the first decades of the twentieth century, under the collaborative efforts of liberal Dutch scholar-administrators, Dutch-educated Javanese nobility, and Javanese nationalists, that the village-based shadow theatre tradition appeared as a useful vehicle for drawing Javanese peasants away from the increasing influence and knowledge of Islam that the steamship and the opening of the Suez Canal enabled and that rising anticolonial feeling fueled. To combat the kyai and the haji in the countryside, the shadow theatre tradition, rather than Islam, was touted as the essence of Javanese culture by small but vocal groups of Javanese nationalists and their liberal Dutch supporters. While Dutch scholars may have been the patrons for these efforts by modernizing Javanese, the priyayi were consciously using the Dutch to further their own program of shaping an inclusive, secular state in which they, the priyayi, rather than orthodox Islamic elites, would eventually assume power. The next chapter shows how the shadow theatre tradition was used to attract the Javanese peasantry into an Indies nationalism that was not dominated by Islam.
