# The regulation of beauty: J. Kats and Javanese poetics
### by Bernard Arps

<!-- TOC depthFrom:1 depthTo:6 withLinks:1 updateOnSave:1 orderedList:0 -->

- [The regulation of beauty: J. Kats and Javanese poetics](#the-regulation-of-beauty-j-kats-and-javanese-poetics)
		- [by Bernard Arps](#by-bernard-arps)
	- [INTRODUCTION](#introduction)
	- [TRADITIONAL JAVANESE LITERATURE AND ITS POETICS](#traditional-javanese-literature-and-its-poetics)
		- [Poetics](#poetics)
	- [THE PEOPLE AND THE TIMES](#the-people-and-the-times)
	- [THE IDEAS](#the-ideas)
		- [The qualities of the poet](#the-qualities-of-the-poet)
		- [Literary aesthetics: the codification of new ideals](#literary-aesthetics-the-codification-of-new-ideals)
		- [The accessibility of the literary work‘s vocabulary](#the-accessibility-of-the-literary-works-vocabulary)
	- [THE OUTCOME](#the-outcome)
	- [NOTES](#notes)

<!-- /TOC -->

## INTRODUCTION

In 1934, when retired headmaster Jacob Kats‘s *Tjengkorongan kawroeh kasoesastran Djawi kapirid ing woedjoed sarta soeraosipoen* (‘Sketch of the knowledge of Javanese literature according to its forms and contents‘) was published in Batavia, European involvement in Javanese literature and poetics was over a century old. Government officials and missionaries had not only studied and described Javanese poetry for a European public since the late eighteenth century, from around 1840 a number among them had actually produced works of literature in Javanese. The best—known Dutch authors of Javanese texts were C. F. Winter the elder and F. L. Winter, members of a Eurasian family of government interpreters and teachers active in the court city of Surakarta in Central Java throughout the nineteenth century. Several dozens of their writings — original works, editions and compilations of older texts, translations and adaptations from Malay, Dutch, and English — were published by the Governmental Printing Press and other publishers, mainly in Batavia, from 1845 onwards, particularly for use in schools. Some were repeatedly reprinted until well into the twentieth century. Members of the Winter dynasty also acted as editors of the earliest Javanese—language periodicals, the first of which appeared in 1855. Other parts of their oeuvre exist in manuscript only. <sup>1</sup>
Jacob Kats was thus by no means the first European student of Javanese letters to take an active role in Javanese literary life. He stood out among his colleagues and predecessors, however, in that he considered it necessary to contribute in person to the standardization of literary norms and their dissemination. Kats authored a poetics of Javanese literature for publication in Javanese and addressed to Javanese readers. He drafted his sketch in Dutch but it was issued in translation only. The Javanese rendition was produced by R. D. S. Hadiwidjana, a language teacher at the teacher— training college of Munthilan in Central Java, who was himself to play a part of some consequence in the field of Javanese literary theory in later years.

As a teacher of Javanese pupils who had lived in the Netherlands Indies from 1897, just before he turned twenty—two, and as a devoted student of Javanese literature and drama, Kats‘s reading experience was considerable. But in his book he did not systematize indigenous poetic theory, and evidently this was not his main aim. He wanted to change conceptions of literature. Kats‘s book can be seen as an attempt to synthesize Javanese practice and European ideas. And, as I shall argue, changes indeed occurred. Kats‘s poetics gained considerable influence. Although in late— 1990s Indonesia the book itself is all but forgotten, some of the central ideas formulated in it linger on in literary theory and practice.

It would be a gross simplification to attribute the transformation of Javanese poetics to Kats‘s efforts alone. In the early decades of the twentieth century, important conceptual changes were taking place in Javanese discourse about traditional writing. First of all, this was the period of the nationalistic awakening of the autochthonous peoples of the Indies. The call for freedom from colonial oppression took many shapes. One powerful faction looked back with longing on the cultural and political achievements of ancient Javanese kingdoms.<sup>2</sup> The discourse of this current of Javanese nationalism included a reorientation towards the classical heritage, especially that springing from the Central Javanese courts, in which literature had played a prominent part. Simultaneously, traditional poetics was codified in written form. These poetical treatises appeared in print and were used in schools and teacher—training colleges. Poetical notions were thus not merely codified, they were also made public in unprecedented ways. There was at the same time a powerful movement — one might even characterize it as a campaign — on the part of a number of Dutch scholars— educationalists to change basic conceptions of literature among Javanese. Jacob Kats was a central agent in this movement. These three historical phenomena — the reorientation towards the literary heritage, the codification of poetics, and the campaign to change literary ideas and ideals — can be summarized in the catch phrase **‘the regulation of beauty‘**. Partly as a consequence of the regulation of beauty, poetical theory became disconnected from existing practices of composition and interpretation. This has been a major factor contributing to the aura surrounding traditional—style Javanese verse in present—day Indonesian society: it is viewed as too exalted to be practiced by ordinary people.<sup>3</sup> The regulation of beauty disqualified certain genres of writing from the category of ‘literature‘ and mystified the person of the poet and his activity.

In this essay I examine the transformation of Central Javanese theoretical discourse on literature of which Kats‘s poetics partook. After setting the scene with a sketch of traditional verse and its theory, I introduce a number of people who instituted changes in poetics in the early twentieth century and the historical conditions under which they worked. Next I address their ideas on Javanese writing. Because these ideas range widely I must focus on certain major points. These are the qualities attributed to and desired of the author, the conception of literary aesthetics, and the accessibility of the text to its audience. The concluding section summarizes the impact of these ideas on literary practice in the long run.

## TRADITIONAL JAVANESE LITERATURE AND ITS POETICS

Pétruk and Garèng are clown—servants familiar from the Central Javanese shadow theatre. Among their main tasks is to amuse the spectators with their banter, which is often absurd though sometimes, depending on the puppeteer‘s or his patron‘s leaning, may have an educational touch. This was also how these characters were enlisted by Kajawen (‘Javaneseness‘), a periodical issued twice weekly by the colonial government‘s literary agency Balé Pustaka from 1926 to 1942. In the popular column ‘The deliberations of Pétruk and Garéng‘, Kajawen‘s associate editor Soemantri Hardjadibrata<sup>4</sup> had the two brothers comment in a humorous manner on social and cultural affairs, often propagating change. In June 1933 their deliberations were headed ‘The utility of reading‘:

>Garéng: ... You were saying that the books in fembang aren‘t comprehensive. Not comprehensive in what sense? Tell me.

>Pétruk: ... You‘ve stated yourself that reading is very useful, but you mustn‘t just read books that have to be squealed, because by and large tembang books just contain folktales or ancient teachings, and esotericism if you‘re lucky. But contemporary knowledge, in fields like technology, manufacture, economics and so on, is still missing. While people today ought to know all these things.

>Gareng: That, ‘Truk, shouldn‘t be blamed on the tembang books, but on their authors. Usually the people that are really on top of such matters don‘t know the first thing about Javanese letters. So it isn‘t just that they‘re unable to write up their knowledge of those things in verse, usually they‘re already at a loss if you ask them to describe it in plain Javanese. On the other hand, really skilled versifiers can‘t make head or tail of such knowledge. But still I‘m confident that later there‘ll be books in tembang with the pick of contemporary knowledge. (Anonymous 1933: 768—9)

Gareng‘s suggestion that the tembang verse forms could be used to versify treatises on technology, industry, and economics may well appear preposterous. After all, tembang was an age—old literary medium, predating even the coming of the Europeans. Tembang is the generic name of a type of stanzaic, melodico—metrical verse forms, which require that verse lines consist of specified numbers of syllables, contain word boundaries in particular positions, and end with specified vowels. These tunes—cum— metres were applied by poets in composition as well as by readers. Tembang literature was read melodically (hence Pétruk‘s banter about ‘books that have to be squealed‘). In group reading sessions, held especially on the occasion of rites of passage, participants or special performers sang in turns from a manuscript or book. In solitary reading, too, a tune was applied to the text. By default the reading of a tembang text was not only melodic but also audible.<sup>5</sup>

In 1933 tembang had been used for at least three and a half centuries, and indeed its most prominent genres were manifestly old—fashioned: chronicles of Javanese history (especially dynastic history of the Central Javanese royal families), romances of heroes set in a more ancient Java, stories of the prophets of Islam, adaptations of Old Javanese narrative poems with story matter deriving from the Indian epics, poems expounding philosophical speculations or moral precepts, and Javano—Islamic mystical dialogues and parables.

The impression easily arises that tembang texts, being versified and sung, must have belonged to a domain of leisure or Art detached from quotidian concerns. Yet, despite all this traditionalism, it is not really surprising that Gareng felt no scruples about the suitability of tembang for genres other than history, fiction, and philosophy. It had been used also in more practically oriented writings, such as magico—religious incantations, treatises on agriculture and divination, lists of synonyms and chronogram words, cultural critiques, and in correspondence. Tembang was thus not a medium for *belles lettres* alone. It was a workaday tool for the construction of texts. Its tunes were generally known and mastered. Its formal structure enabled a reader to decipher Javanese writing with relative ease. Because the page layout that comes with Javanese script has no word separation, prose texts, lacking an organization in units of regular length, were simply more difficult to construe. Tembang texts were also memorable; the coupling of words with tune facilitated the recollection of noteworthy passages. Its built—in melodiousness made text in tembang more pleasant to read and hear than dull prose. And the fact that reading it meant by default performing it gave tembang text a social dimension that prose did not possess. It was not geared for silent and private but for audible and shared consumption.

Tembang, in short, was the Javanese means par excellence for inscribing, publicizing and putting up for debate significant discourse in a pleasing form. In historically founded practice tembang‘s instrumental capabilities, its utilitarian properties, were turned to account in the domains of traditional life in particular. But why could this not be done, in principle, in other cultural domains? To Garéng this was not an issue: fembang was perfectly suitable for contemporary topics. Indeed in the first decades of the twentieth century, composition in tembang was still widespread. Forums for discussion of the texts were also available. Alongside the performance sessions which continued to be held in ritual contexts, since the 1870s there had been reading and debating clubs in aristocratic circles where both older and contemporary texts, for instance essays that appeared in the press, were topics for discussion.<sup>6</sup>

Tembang literature ranges over the three classical European literary categories of narrative, lyricism (eulogies of princes, addresses to a loved one, expressions of longing and sadness), as well as drama (librettos for dance dramas with sung dialogues). But this classification does not correspond with Javanese ones. In the early twentieth century Javanese theorists tended to distinguish narrative (carita), consisting of alternations of description and quoted speech, and two expository categories: mystical science (ngélmu, suluk) and teachings (piwulang), the latter a covering a vast terrain of topics. Sometimes sensualism (peprenésan), including humorous dialogues, was listed as a further category.<sup>7</sup> Narrative predominated and was undoubtedly the most salient category. Mystical, moral—philosophical, and other kinds of expositions were often framed in narrative, as were ‘sensual‘ episodes. Some of the more comprehensive narrative works consisted of hundreds of cantos and thus thousands of stanzas.

All tembang verse makes use of unusual, often archaic vocabulary and special grammatical techniques such as elision, sandhi, and inversion. This is to a large extent conditioned by its prosody and metre, but in some genres the use of such versification devices is more pronounced than in others. They often occur in combination with various forms of euphonic patterning such as assonance and rhyme. This is the case especially in adaptations of Old Javanese poems and in some didactic poems, written in the courts of Central Java between the late eighteenth and the late nineteenth centuries. The use of these stylistic features was probably stimulated by the occurrence of similar poetic devices in the Old Javanese works, which received renewed attention in the same period. Moreover, some sections of poems tend to be more epideictic in character than others. Especially introductory stanzas are.

### Poetics

In view of the technical complexity of tembang verse it may be assumed that there was, from the outset, a poetics of tembang composition. Although it is likely that imitation or learning-through-reading-and-hearing were always important, there must have been explicit teaching of literary techniques as well, and thus a literary theory, however diffuse and ad hoc it may have been. Yet little of this has been transmitted in writing. Literary poetics was probably predominantly oral, and taught by apprenticeship. What has been preserved is mainly lists of metrical structures, grouped according to verse form categories, sometimes illustrated by means of exemplary stanzas. Such surveys are known from the early nineteenth century onwards.<sup>8</sup> There are also quite a few brief theoretical statements in the form of disclaimers of poetic competence — usually cast, paradoxically, in epideictic and abstruse opening stanzas.

The first more encompassing and systematic poetical treatises date from the early twentieth century. They were handbooks for composition in tembang. The Dutch colonial presence was a factor in the appearance of these manuals; indirectly in that some of them were written for use in formal education, that is to say schools set up along western lines, and published; directly because it is likely that the most influential manual was commissioned by Balé Pustaka. At any rate Balé Pustaka published it.

## THE PEOPLE AND THE TIMES

Not long after the Java War (1825—1830), the last stand of the Javanese nobility against the Dutch, began a period when Dutch and Dutch-employed European scholars engaged in the patronage of Javanese literati from whom they commissioned texts in prose, often prosifications of narratives originally written in tembang. The mid—1850s saw the birth of the Javanese mass media, which led to the writing of journalistic prose.<sup>9</sup> Though still on a very limited scale, formal, western—style schooling became accessible to Javanese youth, especially the nobility. Both in the Indies and the Netherlands, the Javanese language began to be taught to would—be colonial officials and officers in the colonial army.<sup>10</sup> Both types of educational institution required prose works — in ‘unbound‘ style, as it was put — as teaching materials. In the same period, young members of the Javanese aristocratic elite became acquainted with Dutch language and culture through boarding with Dutch families.

Despite these prosifying pressures, in the last quarter of the century traditional—style tembang verse was still produced by court poets and princes. But voices became audible proclaiming that the old works of the court poets did not meet the demands of modernity.<sup>11</sup>

These voices became stronger after the turn of the century, in the so— called ethical period of Dutch colonialism. Now the idea became widespread — both among Dutch policy—makers and the Indonesian intelligentsia — that the indigenous peoples of the Indies had to be uplifted from their economic and moral baseness and misery. This was a time of a greater (though far from universal) spread of school education, the growth of an Indonesian—owned and Indonesian—staffed press,<sup>12</sup> the nationalist movements and their call for progress (kamajengan),<sup>13</sup> and the foundation of the Committee for Popular Reading Matter (1908), which in 1917 was to become the Bureau for Popular Reading Matter — or Balai Poestaka (‘The Book House‘) in Malay, Balé Pustaka in Javanese. The committee and its successor published periodicals and books, mostly newly commissioned ones but also editions of acknowledged classics, put them on the market, and, more importantly, placed them in school libraries.<sup>14</sup>

New forms of Javanese literature were created, and Dutch people and institutions were involved in this process. In 1918, for instance, the first Javanese sonnet that has come to my attention was published. It appeared in a Dutch—language volume commemorating the tenth anniversary of the Javanese social, cultural, and later political organization Boedi Oetomo. The poem was a translation by the scholar R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka (1884— 1964) of a sonnet originally written in Dutch by the aristocrat and poet Noto Soeroto (1888—1951), who lived in the Netherlands, and first published in 1916.<sup>15</sup> In the Indies, too, the corpus of Javanese literature was being augmented with European forms. The first Javanese novel widely acclaimed by both Dutch and Javanese critics was R. B. Soclardi‘s Serat Riyanta, published under the Balé Pustaka imprint in 1920. Three years earlier this novel had not only been commissioned by, but even, it has been claimed, outlined by a Dutch official.<sup>16</sup>

The emphasis on historical awareness that was among the characteristics of Javanese nationalism was particularly pronounced in Boedi Oetomo (1908—35) and the Committee for Javanese Nationalism (1917—23). Both organizations were oriented towards the elitist and self—conscious variant of Javanese culture developed at the courts over the previous century and a half, and at the same time inspired by orientalistic modes of cultural representation such as were current in European scholarship of the time and in the international theosophy movement.<sup>17</sup> The basic idea regarding the practical value of past cultural achievements, as formulated by Boedi Oetomo‘s secretary and vice—chairman Sastrawidjana in 1918, was that ‘a people can only lead a national existence if this rests on history and tradition‘ and ‘to disregard the noble and beautiful, the knowledge and abilities which their own ancestors have created, is unworthy of any emerging people'. <sup>18</sup> Historical awareness included awareness of the literary canon. The body of writings that had emanated from the courts in former days was construed as highly significant in Javanese nationalistic discourse of the early twentieth century. It was part of the complex of traditional courtly skills and products that was later characterized with a Javanese pendant of the terms edel (noble) and schoon (beautiful) used by Sastrawidjana, as adiluhung ‘precious and exalted‘.<sup>19</sup> This artistic heritage demanded respect and had to be cherished.

European—derived literary forms were still in their infancy, but in this period there was a surge in writing nevertheless. One Jagawigata complained about this from a reactionary vantage point in a didactic tembang poem published for the Committee for Popular Reading Matter in 1914:

>In the movement that is becoming visible  
it appears that all are striving  
to become practitioners of letters.  
That is a mistaken intention  
and if it goes too far will lead to disappointment  
because it has not been thought over  
sufficiently long.  
[ ... ]

>This is not to condemn the study of writings,  
for it is clear that they may open  
the door to all kinds of learning.  
But surely these are hazardous in the extreme,  
requiring deep contemplation.  
Just to be able to read them  
is easy and undemanding,  
but the depths of their contents  
are profound and hard to fathom  
except by the sanctioned poets [pujangga].

>Hence there are certain limitations.  
As to statesmen,  
they must comply with the letters.  
As to workers, their limit is being literate,  
just in order that they have some enlightenment  
and may discern right and wrong,  
so that, when ordered,  
they see the point and are content to do their duty,  
and are not prone to misunderstand.

>But if all engage in letters  
the rice fields will no doubt lie neglected;  
from where will their income derive?  
Do not make the error  
of thinking that the practice of letters  
is the most valuable thing to do.  
This is a misconception.  
All activities are equal;  
for also artisans, traders, and farmers  
are appreciated if they work well //<sup>20</sup>

Jagawigata‘s essay in verse, entitled 4 book of reminders and advice, was directed against un—Javanese cultural aspirations and developments which the exposure to modernity was engendering, such as the adoption of colonial—Dutch attire and food, which the author considered excesses of the desire for progress. The gist of his argument was that Javanese workers should work, traders should trade, and farmers should farm, as they continued to do also elsewhere in the world. The new writings produced by every Tom, Dick, and Harry, against which Jagawigata was agitating, were mostly published in the Javanese—language newspapers and magazines that were mushrooming in the early twentieth century. It had long been a mark of the cultured gentleman that he could compose texts — in tembang, as Jagawigata, who no doubt counted himself among the ‘statesmen‘ for whom literary activity was admissible, illustrates with his essay. But the difference was that now people of other backgrounds did the same and the results were made widely available. In the view of some, this popularization entailed defilement of the institution of literature. It was widely proclaimed that Javanese literature had come to a close with the demise of the ‘last‘ court poet in 1873 and the last poet—prince in 1881.<sup>21</sup>

But this view was not universally accepted. In fact people both outside and within the palaces, including court officials and princes, not only wrote tembang verse until well into the twentieth century, some even sought to popularize the ability to do so, as the publication of versification manuals in 1912 and 1926 demonstrates.<sup>22</sup>

In 1912 the printers N.V. Budi Utama of Surakarta<sup>23</sup> issued M. Ng. Mangunwijaya‘s Treatise on assonance (Serat Purwakanthi), dated 1911. Amongst other things it contained 32 pages of poetic theory and rules for tembang versification. Mangunwijaya was an employee of the Surakarta court and the author of several traditional—style poems and some prose works, the latter published by Balé Pustaka. He explains in his preface that the court poets (pujangga) and people of wisdom had, to his knowledge, never produced such a treatise. He felt that this gap had to be filled. His compilation of rules would be suitable for the youth who wanted to versify.<sup>24</sup>

R. Hardjawiraga, the author of the second versification manual, was a scion of a family of literati from Surakarta who authored several verse narratives and novels in prose (including a rendition of the Dutch translation of Hector Malot‘s Sans famille). He became an employee of the Bureau for Popular Reading Matter, which was also the publisher of his works.<sup>25</sup> It seems likely that The rules of versification (Pathokaning nyekaraken, first published in Javanese script in 1926, reissued in romanized form, totalling 70 pages, in 1952) was commissioned by the Bureau. In the 1920s Rinkes, its director, had been on the lookout for such manuals in Central Java.<sup>26</sup> Introducing his book, Hardjawiraga declares that good verse composition is the result of talent. His work was meant to make it easier for those endowed with talent to learn how to versify properly, while it should assist the less gifted in discerning good versification and thus in finding suitable reading matter.<sup>27</sup>

But Javanese poetics was not to remain the exclusive domain of Javanese authors for long. As noted earlier, J. Kats (1875—1945) produced a treatise on the forms and contents of Javanese literature, again somewhat longer than its predecessors: 102 pages. It was intended as not as a versification manual — though it quoted the essentials from Hardjowirogo‘s Rules of versification — but as a textbook on literary genres. Kats wrote it for use in teacher—training at the six—year Kweekschool (lit. ‘cultivation school‘) and its three—year continuation, the Normaalschool — which qualified its students for independent primary school teaching.<sup>28</sup> In fact Kats was a prolific writer of textbooks: between 1900 and 1934 he published dozens of primers and readers on language, literature, and vocal music in Dutch, Malay, Sundanese, and Javanese. Some enjoyed reprints and revised editions up to 1942. He also published several scholarly books and articles.

Kats had started out as a teacher in a European school in Batavia, moved to a Protestant missionary society in 1902 to head its teacher—training school in East Java, and entered government service in 1913, returning to Batavia. In the following years he became involved in the Bureau for Popular Reading Matter — it was he, for instance, who commissioned and allegedly outlined the first successful Javanese novel referred to above. From its foundation in 1920 until his retirement in 1931 he was the director of the Institute for the Promotion of the Knowledge of Indigenous Languages and Ethnology of the Netherlands Indies, popularly known as the Kats Institute. Under his supervision this small college in Batavia developed curricula for the teaching of Indonesian languages in primary schools, organized language courses for Dutch teachers in teacher—training colleges, and taught Indonesian teachers how to teach Indonesian languages. After retiring at the age of 55, Kats continued his writing and revising, though with less vigour than before. He died in a Japanese internment camp in 1945.<sup>29</sup>

It was after his retirement that Kats drafted the 'Sketch of the knowledge of Javanese literature according to its forms and contents.' His preface was dated July 1933, that of his translator, R. D. S. Hadiwidjana, December 1933; the book appeared in the following year.

## THE IDEAS

The treatises of Mangunwijaya, Hardjawiraga, and Kats and Hadiwidjana became well known, as is clear from countless quotations and allusions in later writings. Especially the latter two resounded through Javanese poetical discourse. Hardjawiraga‘s manual of 1926 became no less than exemplary.<sup>30</sup> Kats‘s *Sketch*, too, was quoted repeatedly, in fact as late as the 1980s.<sup>31</sup> It is important to observe that at least once the Javanese translator, Hadiwidjana, was mentioned as the author. The book was thus marked as a Javanese product, which must have increased its legitimacy. Hadiwidjana himself was, much later, to author a school grammar and poetics that was influential and in which some of Kats‘s thoughts are echoed.<sup>32</sup> The impact of the *Sketch of the knowledge of Javanese literature* is clearly felt also in the authoritative poetics by Padmasoekatja, published from 1953 onwards in several editions. These books, too, were written for use in education, especially for teacher—training schools." Through the intermediary of Padmasoekatja‘s books, ideas formulated in the Sketch found their way into primers of Javanese literature that are in use in the 1990s.<sup>34</sup>

While Mangunwijaya and Hardjawiraga‘s expositions of the poetics of versification were normative, they were based on current ideas and analysis of traditional texts. Both authors state this in so many words. Their theories were grounded in Javanese practice. Kats‘s ideas were of a different nature. Kats was certainly familiar with Javanese literary works. His numerous readers, his scholarly articles, and his editions and summaries of canonical tembang texts testify to that. But his ideas on the subject were in large part transposed from a different realm of literary thinking. To a considerable extent they were forced upon Javanese texts and stood independent from actual Javanese practice. It is not that Kats was the first to utter European-derived poetical ideas on Javanese soil. Such ideas had been heard for at least fifteen years in Javanese nationalist circles — that is, in coteries of aristocrats who talked about their nostalgia for the glorious past within an orientalistically inspired frame of reference, and often in Dutch. Though many of Kats‘s poetical convictions were not new, his book was instrumental in that it expressed them in Javanese and allowed them to gain currency in that form.

The Sketch consists of two main parts, entitled ‘The knowledge of literature‘ (Kawroeh kasoesastran) and ‘Verbal art‘ (Kagoenan—basa). The former defines literature — including oral literature — as all compositions in language, identifies ‘national Javanese‘ literature (Kasoesastran ‘nasional Djawa‘) as all texts by Javanese and all texts in Javanese, and lays down general norms for the form and content of good verbal art. The second part of the book elaborates on this in three chapters. The first, ‘Divided according to its forms‘ (Kapirid moenggoeh ing woedjoedé), contrasts poetry or ‘bound language‘ and prose, that is ‘unbound language‘, lists textual genres, distinguishes various lingual registers, and discusses types of symbolism such as mefafoor, personificatie, and allegorie. The chapter ‘Ways of expressing in language‘ (Zara kewedaring basa) covers narrative (epiek), which is characterized by being objective, lyric (/yriek), which is subjective, drama (dramatiek), which is dialogic, and adds a brief note on didacticism (didaktiek) to this well—known European triad in a rather half— hearted concession to Javanese classifications. The third chapter, ‘The themes of literary works‘ (Wosing soerasané lajang—lajang kasoesastran), identifies feelings and intentions, characters and types, customs, and sagas as possible literary themes. The book is sprinkled liberally with textual examples and exercises asking the students to name other instances of the phenomenon under discussion.

Two major factors in Kats‘s textbook contributed to the transformation of Javanese conceptions of the main literary vehicle, tembang. First, through Hadiwidjana‘s translation, certain key concepts in Javanese poetical discourse were redefined in such a way as to accord with poetic concepts which were or had been current in the Netherlands, and which, to the extent that they had found favour in Javanese circles, had thus far been expressed in Dutch. Hadiwidjana writes in his preface:

>A small addition: in fact it has been exceedingly difficult for me to find the words for rendering terms [lit. ‘names‘] that have never been introduced into Javanese; hence I have left many as in the original, especially those terms that do not have Dutch equivalents either, such as epic, saga, myth, and the like.

>Furthermore it must be realized that when rendering into Javanese wherever possible I have avoided making changes, so that the author‘s intention remains clear. But, due to the fact that this is a translation, I feel that in many places the formulation is jarring, leading to a sense of disappointment!<sup>35</sup>

Actually it is the notions that Hadiwidjana did manage to represent with Javanese terms that were most likely to give rise to interpretative complications. Basic among these notions were ‘literature‘ in the sense of belles lettres, ‘poetry‘, and ‘poet‘.

Though Kats opened his book by defining literature as all verbal compositions, including not only narratives and poetic descriptions but also letters, charters, and writings about religion, science, animal husbandry, agriculture, geography, customs, et cetera, his next step was to dispense with the latter categories, justifying his move with the simple claim that it was common to exclude them from discussions of literature. What remained were only the belletristic genres. The second transformative factor, then, was that Sketch of the knowledge of Javanese literature formulated norms for literature as ‘art‘, most significantly the ideal of ‘beauty‘ and — paradoxically, from a Javanese viewpoint — the requirement of instantaneous accessibility.

### The qualities of the poet

The term that Hadiwidjana used to render ‘auteur‘ (‘author), ‘schrijver‘ (‘writer), and ‘dichter‘ (poet), the words that Kats must have used in his draft, was pujangga. The use of pujangga in this sense involved an important shift in meaning. In Central Java it was the established term denoting an official court poet and supernaturally sanctioned man of letters to whom extraordinary qualities and capabilities were attributed. Though not hereditary in the strict sense, in Surakarta pujangga—ship was associated with one particular family. Formerly there was, in the Javanese language, simply no single established term corresponding to the western notions of ‘author‘ or ‘poet‘. To represent these concepts, phrases were used such as ‘the one who composes‘ (ingkang nganggit) or ‘the one who writes‘ (ingkang anyerat).

In court tradition the name pujangga was given the deeper meaning, through so—called forced glossing, of ‘a person who performs asceticism‘. According to a nineteenth—century version of a directory of court officials (of course cast in tembang) it was his task to compose verse narratives and official letters,

>which should be able to bring together  
those who have become alienated from their fellows,  
to win people over, causing coolness and touching their hearts. //<sup>36</sup>

As late as 1960, Padmasoekatja characterized the pujangga in the following words:

>A pujangga or kawitana, kawindra, kawiwara or kawiswara (in the field of Javanese literature) is endowed with eight—fold excellence, namely:

>1. Paraméengsastra, he is an expert in the field of letters, an expert in language.
>2. Paramengkawi, he is an expert in the field of composition, an expert in writing.
>3. Awicarita, he excels in the telling of tales, pleasing stories.
>4. Mardawa—lagu, he is skilled in the field of tembang and musical compositions. Mardawa = refined.
>5. Mardawa—basa, he is an expert in the use of pleasing language, which is moving, which is the vehicle for joy, which awakens tenderness and affection, etc.
>6. Mandraguna, he is highly skilled in the field of the arts.
>7. Nawungkridha, his capacity for feeling is so refined that he is able to respond to the unexpressed desires of others.
>8. Sambégana, he is very honourable (in his life).

>To sum up, a pujangga is endowed with superiority: he is outstanding without and within. That is to say: his knowledge of external culture is outstanding (approaching ‘perfection‘), in the field of internal culture he is also the very best. Because he has done his utmost in devoting himself to internal culture, the pujangga is usually able to hear the voice from heaven.

>So high are the standards of a Pujangga in Javanese literature. Therefore, in Javanese society, there have not been many people called pujanggas. From the death of R. Ng. Ranggawarsita until now, there have been no Javanese pujanggas.<sup>37</sup>

The choice of the term pujangga for ‘author‘ or ‘poet‘ was not unprecedented in the Netherlands Indies. It was not Hadiwidjana‘s coinage. It was also used in contemporary Malay/Indonesian, most prominently in the title of the avant—garde periodical Poedjangga Baroe (‘The New Pujangga‘), the first issue of which appeared in the same month when Kats wrote his preface to the *Sketch of the knowledge of Javanese literature*, that is July 1933. There too it suggested extraordinary personal qualities. Inspired to a considerable extent by the ideas of the Dutch literary movement *De tachtigers*, which had emerged in the 1880s and continued to be celebrated and excerpted in Dutch—language literary surveys and readers used in the Indies‘ school system, the ‘new pujanggas‘ were romantic individualists who fetishized Beauty. Their intellectualism, though nationalistic, was radically Europeanized and their main artistic point of reference was Euroamerican—style high art.<sup>38</sup> They had borrowed their Malay/Indonesian appellation from Javanese, and in their usage the main connotations of pujangga bore a striking — though probably unintended — resemblance to those of the courtly Javanese concept: individual genius, social elitism. Their views on the task of the poet—intellectual were several removes from the practice of tembang authorship. Apart from the fact that they wrote in Indonesian, the ‘new pujanggas‘ were not particularly inclined to compose poetic treatises on agriculture, economics, or geography.

In his Dutch draft, Kats probably referred to authors of literary works as ‘kunstenaars‘ (artists). Hadiwidjana thickened the haze of mystery that enveloped the author by rendering this term with the apparently innocuous phrase wong guna ‘able person‘. It is likely that he used the adjective guna because of its links to kagunan, the established term for the complex of Javanese skills that included music, dance, drama, craftsmanship, and also supernatural competence. This term had indeed been used as an equivalent of Dutch ‘kunst! (‘art‘) before Kats and Hadiwidjana. But guna retained the strong connotation of supernatural abilities. While it is still quoted in primers,<sup>39</sup> the common term for ‘artist‘ is now the Indonesian seniman, in Javanese too.

Now, since in Central Javanese discourse pujangga was already firmly established with a specific meaning, its use to denote any poet or author of a written text projected onto a prospective author this desideratum of very special qualities — qualities that are, plainly, unattainable for ordinary mortals. This conception could, of course, only have an impact on literary practice if it was supported by a degree of consensus. And indeed it was reiterated in the early twentieth century that after the death of the ‘closing pujangga‘ in 1873 there would be and could be no more pujanggas.

### Literary aesthetics: the codification of new ideals

Hadiwidjana used the word kasusastran in the sense of ‘literature‘. This, too, involved a semantic shift. In contemporary Javanese, kasusastran had two meanings: the study of language and letters — the closest English equivalent is perhaps ‘philology‘ — and the complex of special linguistic techniques used in verse composition, such as sandhi, elision, inversion, and the use of archaic morphemes.<sup>40</sup> In Hadiwidjana‘s translation of Kats‘s poetics, however, it was the equivalent of Dutch ‘letterkunde‘ or ‘litteratuur‘.

As I pointed out before, though Kats had initially distinguished between literature and verbal art (kagunan basa, a translation of Dutch woordkunst), he actually limited his treatment of the encompassing category to its subcategory. In his book the two notions soon collapsed into one. In effect, kasusastran was equivalent to ‘schone letteren‘, that is *belles lettres*. The conception of literature that Kats proclaimed was the conception that he must have been inculcated with when he went to teacher—training school in the 1890s:

>The mark of really good verbal art is that its content is exquisite and its wording precious, while the exquisiteness of its content and the preciousness of its wording are balanced.<sup>41</sup>

>[Language is used in literature] for the expression of thoughts and perceptions which are elevated above the everyday, that is: which are beautiful — while the form is commensurate with these beautiful or elevated thoughts and perceptions.<sup>42</sup>

The former is Kats and Hadiwidjana‘s definition, the latter is from the literary history textbook that had been most widespread in Dutch schools in the second half of the nineteenth century.

The parallel Malay/Indonesian term kesoesastraan was used in the same period in the same sense as Kats and Hadiwidjana‘s, and it is possible that it had been coined only slightly earlier at the Bureau for Popular Reading Matter. From March 1932 its Malay bi—weekly magazine Pandji Poestaka had featured a column devoted to modern verse in a traditional Malay garb, which was titled ‘Memadjockan kesoesastraan‘ (‘The advancement of literature.<sup>43</sup>

The new conception of kasusastran soon found authoritative recognition. In his monolingual dictionary published in 1939, Poerwadarminta defined the word as ‘a precious and exalted art that is brought into being by means of language in the form of prose narrative, tembang, etc.<sup>44</sup> The earlier meanings of kasusastran, though still widely used, were effaced.

In view of Javanese etymology, the new meaning was apt. The element su— is glossed as ‘good, excellent‘, sastra means ‘letters‘ (both in the sense of ‘written characters‘ and in the sense of ‘writings‘), and the affixes ka— and —an create an abstract noun. The term as a whole may thus well be used to denote something like ‘the complex or concept of excellent letters‘.<sup>45</sup> This, however, was not the sense in which it had been commonly used in Javanese. The generic expression used to name written tembang verse was layang wacan ‘works/books for recitation‘. The crucial difference is that this term carries no connotation whatsoever of goodness or excellence. It is purely formal.

This leads me to my second point with regard to literary aesthetics. According to Kats, the essential feature of art, including literary art, is beauty, which Hadiwidjana chose to render as kaéndahan. The choice cannot have been a difficult one, because there is considerable semantic overlap between this word and Dutch schoonheid. But there was at least one point of incongruity. Kaéndahan and its adjectival base éndah signified (and still signify) natural or material beauty, beauty that is perceived visually, for instance of clothing, a person‘s (especially a woman‘s) appearance, scenery, a building. Indeed Kats introduced his explanation of beauty in art by describing the feelings of contentment and peacefulness that the sight of a flourishing paddy—field could arouse in, for instance, a teacher (not, he states, a farmer, who would be inclined to think about its yield).

In this case, too, what Kats and Hadiwidjana did was lay down in Javanese, for a large readership, ideas that had been in circulation earlier among the Javanese aristocratic nationalists. Schoonheid had been a keyword in the Committee for Javanese Nationalism‘s writings on the cultural heritage, and the notion that art was necessarily schoon and edel had been expressed time and again.<sup>46</sup> Indah and keindahan, the Malay cognates of the Javanese words, were used in some Malay/Indonesian poetry of the 1920s, which also stood under the strong influence of the Tachtigers and of theosophy.

While the new perspective on the kind of allure after which literature should be striving should have been familiar to readers of the Romanticists and to the Javanese culturalists, in a wider Javanese context it was quite revolutionary. In Javanese poetical writings dating from before the 1930s I have never come across the terms éndah or kaéndahan in reference to literature. Tembang verse was ideally ‘captivating‘, ‘lively‘, ‘smooth‘, or more generally: ‘pleasant, agreeable, comfortable!.<sup>47</sup> The aesthetic ideals were thus not expressed by means of a single visual metaphor but in terms of emotion and enunciation.<sup>48</sup> One wonders whether the visual and spatial conception of literary allure was able to strike a chord with Javanese students who were accustomed to experience literature through a temporal process of vocal articulation and sound.

Finally, Kats‘s translator used the term tembang in a novel way. It used to refer to a particular type of Javanese verse forms — metrico—melodic structures — or, in a broader sense, to Javanese song. It was now redefined as ‘poetry‘. In the Sketch all poetry, irrespective of its verse forms, is referred to as tembang.

In the field of literary aesthetics, then, the following reformulations occurred. From a set of formal features belonging to a particular kind of text that encompassed widely different genres and different degrees of ‘poeticalness‘, tembang came to denote ‘poetry‘. Poetry was literary art: kasusastran or kagunan basa, which must be beautiful. Meanwhile pujangga was equated with ‘poet‘. Hence, in order to qualify for the writing of tembang verse, one should be a pujangga. But a pujangga had been a man of extraordinary learning and supernatural abilities, a combination of inborn competence and divine boon, and the role of pujangga was defunct. Since it was impossible to be a pujangga, it was no longer a viable option to compose in tembang.

### The accessibility of the literary work‘s vocabulary

A further point in Kats‘s poetics supported the alienation of poetical theory from established literary practice. I stated earlier that all tembang verse makes use of archaic lexical items, special morphological mechanisms, and special constructions. It does so, however, to variable degrees. This applies in particular to the archaic vocabulary. The more artful the text, the more archaic words it applies. Otherwise it would be too plain, even if such resources as assonance have been used.<sup>49</sup> But Kats‘s objections against archaic vocabulary were strong:

>If Javanese verbal art necessarily uses words that are not generally understood by the public, this demonstrates that it may be said of the Javanese nation in general that their sensibility is in disarray.<sup>50</sup>

This idea was accepted by many Javanese, even when it was not phrased so strongly. At the same time, though, it clashed with the criterion that Kats expressed: that literature should possess material beauty. How could a text be ‘beautiful‘ without poetic vocabulary, which in established literary practice was archaic by definition? How could the ideal of formal beauty be approximated other than by using words whose unfamiliar shape set the text apart from mundane conversational language?

## THE OUTCOME

These, then, were the main forces operative in the regulation of beauty for Javanese literature. Javanese of the early twentieth century were forced into comparing poetical notions and evaluating them. The ideas I have outlined effectuated change. Some traditional ideals were transformed, others displaced and marginalized. It is likely that poetic theory was also enriched, that new themes came to feature in it that had not previously found explicit expression.

The proposition of visual beauty as the defining metaphor for the nature of works of art was disputed. According to the Javanese educationalist Suwardi Suryaningrat, ‘vision‘ was associated with intellectualism and formal, western—style education, while *rasa* ‘feeling‘ was a matter of emotion and language use. He valued the latter more highly, and identified them with ‘Javaneseness‘ to a greater extent than intellectualism and visual perception.<sup>51</sup> The act of regulation itself, the codification in written form, met with criticism as well: language and discourse grow from feeling (rasa), not from teachings. The same applied here as what Suwardi said of the use of notations in music: ‘setting standards for it means oppressing feeling, deadening feeling and art‘.<sup>52</sup> These protests could not but remain marginal, though. The poetics was printed and read. Its use in schools ensured that the new ideas and ideals were instilled into Javanese teachers and pupils. They are generally reflected in later Javanese poetics.<sup>53</sup>

In 1933 it was still possible for a member of the Javanese intelligentsia to suggest that there was room in tembang verse, alongside narrative, moralistic expositions, and mystical science, for works about technology, industry, and economics. These works, however, still had to be written. And they did not materialize. As a consequence of the prescription of beauty, coupled with the unattainableness of the status of pujangga or poet, tembang verse was increasingly strongly identified with the precious and exalted literary products of the eminent court authors of former days. The multi—purpose literary medium that was tembang was confined to a closed canon produced by poets that could no longer exist. It became ineligible for the kinds of contemporary and practical topics that had it long been employed for. It grew too noble for use by all but the most presumptuous writers. Cultural discourse is a chorus of many voices — some recorded in writing. The latter, by their very nature, have the potential to resonate long after their recording. In the polyphony that sang of Javanese literature in the first decades of the twentieth century, Jacob Kats‘s part in Hadiwidjana‘s rendition turned out to be powerful.

## NOTES

1. A brief historical outline of the study of Javanese language and literature by Europeans and especially the Dutch up to the late nineteenth century is in Ras 1992. The role of the Winter family in Surakarta court politics is analyzed in Houben 1994; 120—26. On their involvement in Javanese linguistics, see Uhlenbeck 1964: 45—50 and Arps 1997. Some of their literary activities and products are described in Kuntara 1990; 325 ef passim, Uhlenbeck 1964: passim, and Winter and Ranggawarsita 1987; v—ix. Their publications are listed in Poerwasoewignja and Wirawangsa 1921; 515—16, and some works in manuscript in Pigeaud 1967: 257 and 1970: 433—4. The Winters‘ role in the carly Javanese press is discussed in Adam 1995; 16—19, 26, 45.
2. See Van Miert 1995 for a perceptive study.
3. Focusing on the reception of traditional Javanese literature, Florida refers to this aura as ‘an image of ideal illegibility‘ (Florida 1987; 1). In an earlier critical comment on this article I claimed that the author ‘said that Javanese literature is so incomprehensible to Javanese as to intimidate them into avoiding reading it‘ (Arps 1992; 411). This was misleading; Florida makes it perfectly clear that she attributes the paucity (in her version: the absence) of a readership to the stamp of abstruseness, not to actual incomprehensibility. The present article outlines the historical backgrounds of this aura, though I attend to writing more than reading because it is in this realm that the aura has actually been most prohibitive. The recitation of classical texts continues to be a component of the Javanese soundscape. This article is at the same time an attempt to trace the history of the poetics of versification that was in force in the 1980s and continues to be so in the 1990s. This poetics is analyzed from a largely synchronic perspective in Arps 1992; 187—201.
4. Who was the author of ‘Rembagipun Pétruk + Garéng! according to Ras 1979:18.
5. On tembang see Arps 1992.
6. See Ras 1979: 19 for new fembang works published by Balé Pustaka in the 1920s and 1930s. Poerwasoewignjia and Wirawangsa (1920—21) list publications in tembang up to 1919, and Pemberton (1994; 114—16, 119—20, 128—9) mentions a few works from Surakarta court circles in the late 1910s and early 1920s. Many more, in manuscript, are listed in Florida 1993. The existence of reading and debating associations in the late nineteenth century is pointed out in Arps 1992; 404—5 and Adam 1995; 36.
7. See Anonymous 1928, and Arps 1992; 195 on Hardjowirogo 1952.
8. See Arps 1992; 17.
9. On early Javanese periodicals, see Quinn 1992; 2—3, 11—12, 24—6, and Adam 1995; 16—37.
10. See Fasseur 1993 and 1995.
11. Hazeu 1921: 23, referring to circles of Surakarta literati, especially the Radya Pustaka society for the study of Javanese letters which was founded in 1890 by the court chancellor Sasradiningrat IV (Quinn 1992; 11). Hazeu maintained contacts with members of this society between 1899 and 1903 (Hazeu 1921: 22).
12. See Shiraishi 1990: 32—33, 38, and Adam 1995: 108—24.
13. Progress had in fact been a major theme in newspapers from the late 1880s onwards (Adam 1995: 79—80).
14. On the Bureau for Popular Reading Matter see in particular Jedamski 1992. An English—language brochure celebrating its achievements up to 1929 is Brondgeest and Drewes s.a. Some data on the libraries are in Van der Wal 1963: 83, 404—9.
15. Noto Soeroto 1918: 81, 83—4. On Noto Socroto, who wrote mainly in Dutch, see Nieuwenhuys 1972; 365—9.
16. The importance accorded to the Serat Riyanta in Javanese literary history is considerable; see Suripan sa.: 55—6, Ras 1979; 13, and especially Quinn 1992; 21—2, 56—8. The claim on its Dutch backgrounds is made in Kats 1934b: 20—1.
17. See Van Miert 1995.
18. Sastrawidjana speaking (in Dutch) during the opening of the Congress for Javanese Cultural Development on 5 July 1918, as quoted in Anonymous 1921; 314. On this congress, held in the court city of Surakarta, see Larson 1987: 69—70.
19. See Suwardi Suryaningrat‘s (= Ki Hadjar Dewantara) contribution to the Congress of the Java Institute in March 1927 in Anonymous 1927: 259: ‘tembang, gendhing sarta joged punika kagunan ingkang adiluhung!‘ (‘tembang, gamelan music and dance are precious and exalted arts‘). Adilwhung. is still used as a watchword in reference to traditional arts in modern Indonesia; see Florida 1987, Sumarsam 1995; 113—30.
20. ‘Kang wus katon obahé samangkin / sesemuné kang sami jinangkah / kudu olah sastra kabeh / iku panjangka luput / yén kabanjur angapirani / saking durung ginagas / dawaning panemu / ... // Nora nacad wong marsudi tulis / dhasar nyata yen bisa ambuka / lawanging piwulang kabéh / marma rungsid kalangkung / nora céthek lamun binudi / yen mung bisané maca / gampang nora éwuh / nanging jeroning surasa / nyamut—nyamut nora gampang dénjajagi / kajaba pra pujangga // Marma ana watesé pribadi / yen tumrapé kang ulah nagara / kudu ngugemi sastrané / déné kang bangsa bau / watesané weruh ing tulis / mung amrih rada padhang / wruh ing bener—luput / supaya yen pinaréntah / nuli ngandhang dhangané nglakoni wajib / nora selang—surupan // Nanging lamun kabéh olah tulis / nora wurung sawahé kapiran / saking endi pituwasé / aja kaliru surup / angarani wong olah tulis / luwih aji priyangga / kang mangkono luput / kabéh—kabéh nora béda / nadyan kriya nangkoda miwah wong tani / yen becik pinilala // (Jagawigata 1914; 11—12).
21. The ‘last court poet‘ (pwangga panutup, lit. ‘closing pujangga‘) was R. Ng. Ranggawarsita (1802—73), and the last poet—prince was Mangkunagara IV (1811—81, r. 1853—81). Early published expressions of the idea that their passing had marked the end of Javanese literature are found in Noto Soeroto 1911; 317—8, Soeria Soeparta 1912:vi, and Noto Soeroto 1918: 77; see also Hazeu 1921: 20—21, Drewes 1974, and Quinn 1992; 267—71. Drewes claims that Ranggawarsita himself asserted to be the last of the court poets (1974; 212), but without giving sources.
22. Other works on versification appeared in 1914 and 1930, but these were less comprehensive and less well—known. They are discussed in Arps 1992; 77—8, 80—1, 84.
23. This was probably the printing office of the Surakarta branch of the Boedi Oetomo movement (cf. Larson 1987; 55).
24. Mangunwijaya 1912, Voorbericht. For his other published works, see Poerwasoewignja and Wirawangsa 1921: 510.
25. Some of Hardjowirogo‘s writings published in book form are listed in Ras 1979: 18, 22.
26. Witness the fact that a few of them are found in his collection of Javanese manuscripts, now in Leiden University Library (see Pigeaud 1968: 507, Cod. Or. 8982 nos. 2 and 3, from Surakarta and Yogyakarta, respectively).
27. Hardjowirogo 1952; 5.
28. Kats 1934a; m. For some information on these schools, see Dolk 1993;
29. Kats‘s biography and bibliography are given in Poeze 1984. See also Grijns 1991; 54—7.
30. See Arps 1992, chapter 5.
31. See for instance M. 1941 and Soebagijo 1981.
32. Hadiwidjana 1967.
33. Padmosoekotjo s.a., 1978—82.
34. See, for instance, Sutjipto Adi er al. 1983 (fourth impression 1990).
35. ‘Njela atoer sekedik: Saloegoenipoen saklangkoeng rekaos anggén kula pados temboeng—temboeng kanggé anggelaraken nama—nama ingkang pantjén toemraping basa Djawi déréng naté dipoen wontenaken, pramila inggih katah ingkang taksih koela locgokaken kémawon, langkoeng—langkoeng nama—nama ingkang tiara Walandinipoen kémawon inggih boten wonten, kadosta: Epos, Sage, Mythe, lan sapanoenggilanipoen. Kadjawi poenika andadosna kawoeningan, anggén koela andjawékaken poenika sasaged—saged sampoen koela ingsad—ingsed moerih ing tjetanipoen poenapa ingkang dipoen kersakaken padoeka Djoeroe—ngarang, nanging réhning nama "pertalan", basanipoen roemaos koela pijambak meksa taksih kerep moeroegaken kraos mak djegagik, kados raosipoen tijang ketjelik poenika!‘ (Hadiwidjana in Kats 19342: iv).
36. ‘ingkang bisa ngrakétena / ing arénggang sasaminya / miluta nys kraseng nala // (Sérat Cénthini 1988; 267). Coolness is good — this is in the tropics.
37. Padmasoekatja s.a. I: 13. Emphases in the original.
38. See, inter alia, Sutherland 1968; Dolk 1993; 56—64.
39. E.g. Sutjipto Adi et al. 1983; 10. Guna in wong guna is paraphrased here as pinter, i.c. ‘skilled, able‘. But wong pinter is also an extremely common euphemism for dhukun, a magic specialist.
40. In Arps 1992; 193—4 only the second sense is discussed.
41. ‘Titikané Kagoenan—basa kang betjik temenan, jaikoe menawa soerasané édi sarta tetembungané péni, tor édining soerasa lan pénining tetemboengané ikoe bisa timbang!‘ (Kats 1934a: 14).
42. ‘... tot het uiten van gedachten en gewaarwordingen, die boven het alledaagsche verheven, dat is: die schoon zijn — en de vorm aan deze schoone of verhevene gedachten en gewaarwordingen evenredig is‘ (Willem Hofdijk, Geschiedenis der Nederlandsche letterkunde voor gymnasién en zelf—onderricht, Amsterdam 1857, as quoted in Mathijsen 1987; 14—15).
43. Dolk 1993; 55—6.
44. ‘kagoenan adiloehoeng kang kalairaké sarana basa awoedjoed tjrita gantjaran, tembang Isp.‘ (Poerwadarminta 1939; 191). In the Javanese—Dutch dictionary that was Poerwadarminta‘s model, one word sufficed to translate kasoesastran: ‘"letterkunde‘ (Pigeaud sa.: 170).
45. See Arps 1992; 193 for a discussion of the use of susastra, the main sense of which was ‘fond of writings/letters‘ in the nineteenth century.
46. See Van Miert 1995: 92, 100—1, 115; Sastrawidjana‘s speech of 1918 quoted earlier; Noto Soeroto 1918: 80—1.
47. Arps 1992; 191—4.
48. Cf. Braginsky‘s analysis of the concept of indah in traditional Malay poetics, which is not essentially visual either (Braginsky 1993; 75—91), and Zoetmulder‘s (1974; 172—3) and Robson‘s (1983) treatments of Old Javanese literary aesthetics, in which the concept of /ango (the feeling of longing or being entranced, rapture) stands central.
49. Arps 1992; 195—6.
50. ‘Menawa Kagoenan—basa Djawa kepeksa nganggo temboeng—temboeng kang oemoemé ora dingreténi ing ngak¢h, ikoe tanda jén oemoemé bangsa Djawa kena tinemboengaké bocbrah pengrasané‘ (Kats 1934a: 17).
51. See Suwardi Suryaningrat in Anonymous 1927: 258—61.
52. ‘. .. manawi dipun ugeri nama masésa dhateng raos, adamel pejahing raos sarta kagunan‘ (Suwardi Suryaningrat in Anonymous 1927; 261).
53. See Arps 1992; 193—4.
