# Javanese

Javanese is the language of the whole of Central and East Java, with the exception of the Madurese-speaking areas of East Java. In West Java Javanese is spoken in an extensive area in the north east with Tjerebon as its most important center and further along the north coast as far as the Djakarta area and finally also in the northern part of Banten, west of Djakarta.

Outside Java, Javanese speakers are found in Sumatra, Borneo and Celebes, whither emigration from densely populated regions of Java (Kedu) has been encouraged by the government from 1905 onwards. Most important of these immigrant settlements are the Lampung districts (centres: Wanasaba, Gedongtatain and Sukadana), where the Javanese colonists have become more numerous than the autochthonous population. Other immigration centres in Sumatra are Belitang, Lubuk Linggau and Bongko; in Borneo, Pengaron on the south coast, east of Bandjermasin; in Celebes Mapili and Paria. No recent data on the actual number of Javanese speakers in these areas are available. On the east coast of North-Sumatra Javanese is spoken by large groups of Javanese plantationworkers.

Between 1890 and 1939 about 36.000 Javanese were brought over to Surinam on the north coast of South America. Only a small percentage of them returned. Nowadays the Javanese speaking section of the population numbers about 43.000. The census report of the Netherlands Indies of 1930 put the total number of Javanese at nearly 28 million. According to a moderate estimate today at least 40 million Indonesians have Javanese as their first language.

## The Beginnings Of Javanese Studies

Up to the beginning of the 19th century the scientific knowledge of Javanese was - understandably enough - very limited. A short Malay-Javanese-Dutch wordlist can be found in the collective work "Begin ende Voortgangh van de ... Oost-Indische Compagnie" (1646).
Some words taken from this wordlist together with the Javanese syllabary, a list of Javanese titles and a specimen of Javanese writing (see the reproduction opposite p. 48) has been published by the wellknown Dutch orientalist A. Reland (1677-1718). Herbert de Jager (16361694) was the first to notice the presence in Javanese of many Sanskrit loanwords. The oldest Javanese dictionary is the Lexicon Javanum (1706), a manuscript now kept at the library of the Vatican in Rome.
The author of this dictionary is not known. The manuscript was sent from Java to Reland possibly by the Dutch minister Petrus van der Vorm (1644-1731) who after the death of Leydekker (1701) was invited to complete his Malay translation of the Bible. To this rather extensive lexicon (75 fol. written on both sides) are attached some folios containing a number of Javanese sentences in ngoko and in krama, a calendary and a syllabary. A photostat of this early 18th century lexicon can be consulted at the Royal Institute in The Hague.
In the negotations with Javanese rulers the Dutch made use of Javanese as a means of communication and all through the 18th century there have been at least a few, mostly Eurasian, interpreters or translators with a sometimes remarkable practical knowledge of Javanese, witness for instance the Dutch translation of the Tjerebon code of law of 1768 (Hazeu 1905) and of a Sérat Kanda which probably dates from about the same time.

Although, as Brandes has observed (Notulen Bat. Gen. 1904 p. 131), Dutchmen like Engelhard, Radermacher and Cornelius had already shown laudable interest in things Javanese, it is owing to British effort that the first basis for the scientific study of Javanese was laid. Raffles in 1817 and Crawfurd in 1820 were the first to pay more than superficial attention to Javanese language and literature. Although their grammatical observations and the vocabularies they compiled understandably enough are now only of historical interest, the fact deserves to be mentioned that Raffles already clearly understood the futility of any attempt to apply the categories of traditional Latin-based grammar to a language so utterly different in structure as Javanese. Unpublished data collected by Crawfurd were used by Von Humboldt in his famous work on the

44 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Kawi language (1836-1839). It seems that he had at his disposal a grammar made by Crawfurd and three dictionaries in manuscript, two of which probably also had been made by Crawfurd. In the appendix to the second volume of Von Humboldt's work samples of these dictionaries can be found.

Already during the governor-generalcy of Daendels, before the government of Raffles, a need for better knowledge of the language made itself felt, as relations with the Javanese tended to become more frequent. Because of the introduction of the land rent system this need became still more urgent. In 1819 the Dutch successor of Raffles, governor-general Van der Capellen, decided to engage a number of promising young men called éléves for the study of indigenous languages, in the first place of Malay and Javanese.

Moreover British and subsequently Dutch missionary societies had begun to envisage the necessity of starting missionary activities in Java.
In 1814 the German missionary Bruckner took up his residence first in Semarang and later in Salatiga, his main task being to prepare himself for the translation of the Bible into Javanese. In 1823 he completed an elementary Javanese grammar, the first ever made, but as no Javanese lettertype existed at that time in Java he went to the Danish mission in Serampore (Bengal) in order to get his grammar printed. His book bears the year 1830 as its date of publication.

The second missionary to devote himself to the study of Javanese was the German J. F. C. Gericke who was sent to Java by the Netherlands Bible Society in 1827. Four years later, in the same year that Bruckner's grammar became available in Java, Gericke was able to publish an elementary grammatical introduction, together with a Javanese reader and a wordlist.

Of the above-mentioned éléves for the Javanese language only two made contributions to the study of Javanese, namely A. D. Cornets de Groot Jr. and P. P. Roorda van Eysinga. Both wrote a Javanese grammar. In contradistinction to Roorda van Eysinga's rather pompous grammar of 1835, the one left by the gifted Cornets de Groot after his untimely death in 1829 at the age of 25, was, even in its unfinished state, a remarkable work and no doubt the most valuable of the four grammars of the early thirties. It was published in 1833 as volume 15



TACO ROORDA 1801-1874

JAVANESE 45

of the Transactions of the Batavia Society with a preface by Gericke and reprinted in a slightly revised version in 1843 together with Gericke's reader, but with a new wordlist made by T. Roorda, who in footnotes added a number of grammatical observations and corrections of his own. Two lengthy reviews of this second edition appeared, one by Veth in "De Gids" and another by Wilkens in the "Tijdschrift voor Wilkens' review, published in several instalments, is easily the best of the two being clearly written by a man with a sound factual knowledge of the language.

As the recruitment of éléves for the Javanese language did not produce the desired results, the government on the instigation of Gericke decided in 1832 to found a special institute for the Javanese language in Surakarta, to which ten "pupils of Christian faith", six educated in the Netherlands and preferably already in the Dutch civil service, and four educated in Java, were to be admitted. Also those sent by the Netherlands Bible Society to Java for the study of the language could gain admittance. For the first two years Gericke was director of this institute. His successor was C. F. Winter, who in 1825 had succeeded his father as official Javanese translateur.

Another modest centre of Javanese studies was established in the Netherlands at the military college of Breda in 1836. In that year it was decided that Dutch army officers to be sent to Java had to have some knowledge of Javanese and Malay. The first to teach these languages at this college was P. P. Roorda van Eysinga. After his return to Java in 1843 he was succeeded by J. J. de Hollander, the author of a much used manual for the study of Javanese language and literature which appeared in 1848. It was not the result of independent research, but it made use of the then existing knowledge of the language.

2. JAVANESE STUDIES IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE 19tH cENTURY

With Roorda in the Netherlands and with Winter and Wilkens in Java the study of Javanese entered into a new phase.

Roorda, from 1828 professor of Oriental languages, Hebrew Antiquities and the Interpretation of the Old Testament, and from 1834

46 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

also professor of philosophy at the Athenaeum Illustre of Amsterdam, turned to the study of Javanese shortly after the grammar of Cornets de Groot became available in the Netherlands. His interest in the language arose out of his contact with his student J. A. Palm who was to be sent by the Netherlands Bible Society to Java to assist Gericke in his task of translating the Bible. In his capacity of member of the committee on native affairs of this society Roorda had to supervise Palm's studies. In 1835 after three years of study under Gericke and Winter in Java, Palm returned to the Netherlands in order to make possible the manufacture of a new set of Javanese printing-types.
He was accompanied by a well-educated Javanese, Raden Pandji Poespawilaga. After the death of Palm in 1837 Roorda took over his task and in 1839 a complete set of Javanese printing types were made in Haarlem by the well-known type-foundry of Johannes Enschedé and Sons. Meanwhile Gericke had returned to the Netherlands and he together with Raden Pandji Poespawilaga helped Roorda in getting better acquainted with the language.

Not without importance for the further development of Indonesian studies in the Netherlands in general was Roorda's address delivered in 1841 in presence of king William II in a combined session of the four sections of the Royal Dutch Institute, the fore-runner of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences. In this address Roorda expounded the thesis that for efficient government of the Indies knowledge of Javanese, that is the language spoken by more than half of the population, was an urgent necessity for civil servants. Shortly afterwards, in 1842, a new college was founded in Delft for the training of Dutch colonial civil servants. As could be expected Roorda left Amsterdam to become professor of Philology, Geography and Ethnology of the Netherlands Indies at the new college in Delft with the special task of teaching Javanese. At the same time the institute for the study of Javanese in Surakarta was closed, not only because it was deemed to be superfluous after the establishment of the new college in Holland, but also because of unfavourable reports on the conduct of several of its students.

When Roorda entered upon his new office in Delft, no reliable materials for the study of the language were available to his students.

JAVANESE 47

To remedy this situation as rapidly as possible, between 1843 and 1845 Roorda published besides the new edition of the grammar of Cornets de Groot mentioned above, a collection of Javanese conversations written by an anonymous Javanese from Surakarta with a supplementary wordlist, an edition of the Radja Pirangon (= the story of the prophet Moses), an edition of five Javanese codes of law and a collection of Javanese letters, official reports, proclamations, official minutes, records etc. These were followed by various editions of translations and compilations of Javanese literary works made by Winter on the invitation of Roorda for which we refer to the bibliography on Javanese literature.

Roorda's principal achievements for the study of Javanese are in the fields of lexicography, grammar and literature. His first substantial contribution to the scientific knowledge of Javanese was the edition of a Javanese dictionary in 1847. Beside the data of Raffles and Crawfurd and the very elementary vocabularies compiled by the Senerpont Domis (1827) and by Bruckner (1842) the only Javanese dictionary of any size was the one published by Roorda van Eysinga in 1835 which as the knowledge of Javanese increased, completely lost its value. In addition to them there existed the wordlists made by Roorda in 1843.
The new dictionary of 1847 was compiled by Gericke and augmented, corrected and edited by Roorda. The basis of this dictionary consisted of various materials. In the first place unpublished data collected by Bruckner to which Gericke had added his own data, partly received from Winter and from some Javanese informants during his stay in Surakarta. This material was put at the disposal of Roorda, who was able to drastically revise it with the help of information received from Winter, and by using the many lexicographical contributions of Wilkens in his review of the second edition of Cornets de Groot's grammar.

It soon became apparent that this dictionary showed many imperfections and lacunae. Already a year after its publication Roorda had to add a supplementary wordlist to the Zamenspraken of Winter, because it contained many words which were not or not sufficiently explained in the dictionary. New additional data were published by

48 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Roorda in 1855 in the anthology which formed the second volume of his Javanese grammar.

In 1862 Roorda together with Meinsma published a second supplement which made superfluous the inclusion of a supplementary wordlist in the second edition of Winter's Javaansche Zamenspraken. In 1868 still another supplement was published, compiled by the missionary Jansz. It was clear that a new edition of the dictionary was urgently needed. Moreover the first impression had already been sold out for many years.

Roorda devoted the last years of his life (1869-1874) nearly entirely to bringing out this second edition, getting valuable help from a Javanese-speaking son of Winter's. His most important source of new data was the manuscript of the Javanese-Dutch dictionary made by Winter and Wilkens which was put at his disposal after the death of Winter in 1859. Roorda did not live to see his dictionary published.
At his death in 1874 more than 80 % of the book was printed. It was completed by A. C. Vreede and others with the assistance of A. B.
Cohen Stuart. This edition of 1875 proved to be in many respects a completely new dictionary, not only because of the many new data which could be included, but also because the increase in grammatical knowledge made it possible to organize the lexicological facts in a more satisfactory way than had been possible in 1847. Eleven years later a third edition became necessary which was also prepared by Vreede, who for this edition profited from the assistance of H. Kern.
For this edition Vreede could make use of many new data collected i.a.
by Sollewijn Gelpke, Meinsma, Raden Mas Ismangoon, Palmer van den Broek, Kern and Poensen. An extensive supplement to the GerickeRoorda lexicon published by Jansz however was not used by Vreede, apparently because the publisher of this supplement objected. The fourth and last edition of 1901 which materially differs from the preceding impressions, will be discussed below.

It is not easy exactly to determine the value of Roorda's lexicological studies, because from the very beginning he was assisted first by Gericke, later in a much higher degree by Winter and Wilkens. It cannot seriously be doubted that Winter and especially Wilkens have to be considered at least as co-authors, perhaps even as the main

Javanese alphabet and specimen of Javanese writing (probably originating from West Java) found on p. 92 of the 3rd vol. of A. Reland's Dissertationes miscellaneae (1706-1708).

JAVANESE 49

authors of the various editions of the main Javanese dictionary which is now known to every student of Javanese simply as "Gericke and Roorda". Brandes (in TBG 32, p. 201) as well as Kiliaan (in IG 24, 1, p. 430) were certainly correct in pointing out the importance of the role played by Winter and Wilkens, which for a long time was not sufficiently appreciated.

For both men Javanese was more or less their first language. The greater part of their lives was spent in its study. Although without any formal training in language study, they were both keen observers.
By this quality and by their intimate knowledge of Javanese daily life, they were able to perform an extremely useful task during the first stages of the exploration of the language which around 1850 was still largely unknown.

Winter, from 1825 official translator, was attached to the Institute for the Javanese language from 1832 to 1843, from 1834 onwards being its director. His best known publication is his Javaansche Zamenspraken (= Javanese conversations) which were published in two volumes, the first one in 1848 by Roorda who added a wordlist explaining the words not found in his Cornets de Groot-edition, the second one in 1858 by Keyzer. The first volume had to be reprinted several times (1862, 1882, 1903, 1911), as it was used as a reader by many generations of Dutch students, first in Delft and later in Leiden.
The book has been criticized as furnishing unreliable material for Roorda's linguistic studies, because the conversations were not recorded but made up by Winter himself. Although it is true that some conversations make a rather stilted and unnatural impression, in general this criticism seems to be not quite justified ; in the first place because it did not take into account that Winter's command of the language came near to that of a native speaker and secondly because it cannot be shown that except on some minor points the linguistic analysis made by Roorda contained errors due to the quality of Winter's data. The importance of Winter's contribution did not consist in his own publications and his many translations, but in his untiring effort in a correspondence kept up for many years, to give Roorda all the factual information he needed. He was considered, and quite correctly so, "the Javanese fountain-head of the Royal Dutch Academy".

4

50 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Winter's best student at the institute in Surakarta was Wilkens.
Like Winter, Wilkens had an excellent factual knowledge of the language. After the closing of the institute in 1843 both men were commissioned with the task of compiling a Javanese grammar and a dictionary. In 1856 their grammatical introduction written in Javanese appeared. After the death of Winter in 1859 Wilkens continued working at the dictionary till the end of his life (1888). By that time the manuscript of the dictionary had swollen to an enormous size: 26 volumes in folio were the result of their joint labor, to which Wilkens alone added 43 volumes compiled after 1859. It can be consulted at the University library in Leiden.

Like Winter, Wilkens kept in close touch with Roorda. Whereas Winter never left Java, Wilkens went to the Netherlands in 1848 together with the Javanese Sastratama for a period of three years of fruitful cooperation with Roorda.

In 1855 Roorda's crowning achievement, his long expected Javanese grammar finally appeared. The first of its two volumes aimed at giving a full length description of Javanese as spoken in Surakarta in the middle of the 19th century. Of its more than 500 pages, about 80 were devoted to the phonology of Javanese and its writing system, about the same number to what was called syntax at that time, while the bulk of the book contained a detailed exposition of word-formation and the various parts of speech. An attractive feature was its great amount of illustrative material; it is to be regretted that in the later editions (1874, 1882, 1893, 1906) this was cut down severely. The second volume consisted of an anthology, followed by a wordlist. An abstract of this grammar made by Cohen Stuart was published by te Mechelen in 1882.

Also for his grammatical analysis Roorda owed a great debt - duly acknowledged in his preface - in the first place to Wilkens but also - though in much lesser degree - to Winter. This does not alter the fact that Roorda's grammar was by 19th century standards a firstrate and original work. It put the study of Javanese on a scientific basis and exerted a wide influence on Indonesian linguistic studies.
Several grammars not only of Javanese but also of other Indonesian languages were modelled after it. Roorda's new terminology, devised

JAVANESE 51

to suit the needs of the language, while arousing a certain amount of dissent, was at least partly accepted by other writers of grammars after him.

It stands to reason that the grammar and the linguistic views of its author possessed several weaknesses, of which only a certain number were discernible in the 19th century. The most conspicuous one was the status accorded by him to Javanese within the MalayoPolynesian language family. It was true that judged by the number of its speakers and by the wealth and age of its literature Javanese was the most important language of all Indonesian languages, but from a genetic point of view no such pre-eminence could be claimed with any justification. Roorda clearly had difficulty in accepting the obvious fact that in many respects modern Javanese had to be considered as a later development in comparison with for instance Malay.
Secondly Roorda's historical explanations tended to be based solely upon Javanese facts without taking into account data from other Indonesian languages; often they were mere guesses which rarely were of any value. Thirdly Roorda was blamed, certainly with less justification, that he displayed a tendency to force the facts into a preconceived framework of a logical nature. Fourthly he was reproached for the fact that instead of using genuine Javanese texts he relied too much upon Winter's translations and artificial conversations, and sometimes uncritically accepted the informations gained from him.

The first to point out these shortcomings was the certainly no less brilliant scholar in the field of Indonesian linguistics, H. Neubronner van der Tuuk. In a brochure, published before his famous Toba-Batak grammar came out, and written with astonishing competence, but marred by a number of superfluous personal remarks, Van der Tuuk made abundantly clear that he was by no means ready to subscribe to Roorda's linguistic views or to accept Roorda's grammar as a model for the description of other Indonesian languages. Van der Tuuk's brochure was not long left unanswered. In a long article published in the Bijdragen of 1864 Roorda tried to defend himself on various points, not quite unsuccesfully in so far as they bore on Javanese facts.
Van der Tuuk answered with a second brochure in the same year.
Meanwhile Koorders had come to the rescue of his teacher. Van der

52 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Tuuk immediately reacted to his pamphlet with a caustic reply (1865).

To understand this clash between Roorda and Van der Tuuk with its highly emotional overtones it is necessary to bear in mind that they were scholars of widely divergent temperament and ability.
Between them a series of fundamental contrasts existed. Whereas Van der Tuuk had gained a wide first hand experience of various Indonesian languages acquired in the field, Roorda was, as far as his Indonesian studies go, virtually a man of one language. Moreover the fact that he had never been in Java and therefore had to rely on information imparted to him by others, provided a second contrast.
Thirdly Van der Tuuk was very well acquainted with the historical comparative method as it gradually developed in the Indo-European field, which enabled him to apply it to Indonesian language-material.
Roorda however was a descriptivist avant la lettre. His - nearly always faulty - historical explanations were to him matters of secondary importance, his main occupation being to describe the Javanese facts without taking into account any historical or comparative consideration. Fourthly in contrast with Van der Tuuk who followed the historical-comparative trend, Roorda was highly interested in what nowadays would be called general linguistics. This is proved by his book on the logical analysis of language as a basis for a scientific study of language, by his treatise on metrics (with its enquiring opening sentence: what is it that makes a verse into a verse?) and last but not least by his modest manual on parsing, written for the use of teachers in elementary schools, which in some respects was nearly a century ahead of its time. In his polemical articles against the traditionally minded Dutch scholars De Vries and Brill one meets the same ability to look at the (in this case: Dutch) facts without any historical bias and with a remarkable insight in the synchronic reality of a language which has to be described according to its own categories. Finally Roorda was a man enjoying the respect of a high academic position, a prominent member of the Dutch Royal Academy of Sciences, and generally considered the official oracle on all that pertained to Indonesian languages. On the other hand in the sixties Van der Tuuk was a still comparatively unknown man in the scientific world of Holland, living in difficult circumstances. Not without reason he had the feeling

JAVANESE 53

that he and people like him were doing the work of exploration that really counted, while others comfortably living in the home-country took the honours of their toil. In his eyes those who worked in the Indies were the practitioners and the real experts; what was done in the Netherlands was only empty theorizing with the help of data furnished by others. Especially these feelings and a lack of recognition explain, perhaps more than anything else, not only the caustic tone of Van der Tuuk's brochures but also his need to publicly dissociate himself from all that Roorda seemed to stand for and to clarify his position before embarking upon the publication of his famous Toba-Batak grammar.

Much in the Roorda-Van der Tuuk polemic is now only of historical interest. The study of Javanese was not much furthered by it. On both sides one finds unwarranted speculation which may be passed over in silence, such as Van der Tuuk's theory of the origin of certain Javanese affixes. From the point of view of comparative linguistics things were different. It is only Van der Tuuk's brochures which have earned a lasting place in the history of comparative Indonesian linguistics, because they contain the first formulation of the two important phonetic laws, later justly baptised by Brandes in his thesis of 1884 as the first and the second law of Van der Tuuk.

In the same period during which the dictionary of Gericke-Roorda and Roorda's grammar reached print, another important result of many years of Javanese study was attained : the translation of the Bible. The first missionary to begin with its translation was G. Bruckner, who already in 1823 completed the Javanese rendering of the New Testament. Like his grammar it was printed in Serampore, in 1829. Meanwhile the missionary Gericke was sent to Java by the Netherlands Bible Society to prepare himself for the task of making a new translation, probably because Bruckner's translation was not considered satisfactory.
He did not start translating until 1835. After having published a biblical reader in 1841, he was able to bring out a new translation of the New Testament in Javanese characters in 1848, followed six years later by a translation of the Old Testament in three volumes, also in Javanese characters. At that time Gericke, not satisfied with his first translation, had made a revision of his translation of the New Testament. However, Roorda who in 1836 had become adviser to the

54 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Netherlands Bible Society and who had supervised the printing of Gericke's translation thus far, voiced strong objections against the new version which led the Bible Society to the decision to stop the printing of the new translation which had already started. When Winter, whose advice had been asked, reported that Roorda's objections were justified, Roorda was entrusted with the task of correcting Gericke's version.
This corrected version came off the press in 1860. Since then numerous biblical readers and hymnbooks have been published, which need not be mentionded here. Revised editions of the New and the Old Testament made by P. Jansz appeared between 1890 and 1893. In 1933 and 1941 a revision of the New Testament and of the Old Testament respectively came out, prepared by P. A. Jansz and D. Bakker and by P. A. Jansz and F. L. Bakker in Roman characters, while a few years later a modernized revision of the whole Bible was published (1949-50).

While the history of the Javanese translation of the Bible is easy to trace, virtually no data are available about the history of the translation of the Koran. The first translation was published in Javanese characters in 1858. A second translation printed together with the original text started to appear in instalments in 1884. It is not certain that more than 8 of the 30 sections of the Koran reached print. The translation was made by the Javanese ulamae Bagoes Ngarpah. In the university library of Leiden and in the library of the Central Museum in Djakarta manuscripts containing an interlinear Javanese translation are kept. According to prof. Drewes (personal communication) a third translation has been prepared by Muhammadiyah. A first instalment appeared in Semarang in 1924. As far as professor Drewes knows, 15 instalments have appeared.

The various Bible- and Koran translations can be found in the bibliography s.v. Pradjandjian and Koeran.

3. FURTHER EXPLORATION OF JAVANESE LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE The main development of Javanese studies in the second half of

the nineteenth century was the gradual exploration of the vast and around 1850 still virgin field of Javanese literature. This task attracted

JAVANESE 55

a number of first class scholars: Cohen Stuart and later especially Brandes, Kern and Van der Tuuk. The precedence given by them to Javanese philology led to concentration on the older stages of the language. The further study of the spoken language however was left to people often without academic background, who by their long residence in Java were very well practically acquainted with the language, but who lacked the necessary linguistic training.

This development accounts for the fact that from the point of view of descriptive linguistics no advances of great significance could be made. This does not mean that no new grammars were published, but they were largely simplifications and popularizations of Roorda's grammar, only showing some progress on subordinate, factual points.
The most extensive grammar of this type was written by the missionary Jansz, the most productive author in this period. After having published in 1862 a short elementary introduction together with a few conversations, idiomatic expressions and a wordlist, he was able to expand this introduction gradually with each new impression, until finally the fourth edition of 1893 numbered more than 500 pages, exclusively devoted to grammatical description. The other materials which had formed part of the first edition were published separately from 1872 onwards. Other more concise descriptions which served as manuals for Dutch students were composed by De Hollander (1886), Fokker Sr (1891) and Grashuis (1897). In the second half of the 19th century also the first elementary grammatical treatises appeared, written by scholars of other European countries (Favre 1866 in French, Bohatta 1892 in German) and by Javanese authors in Javanese. A treatise by Ronggawarsita, mostly on Javanese script, was published by Padmasoesastra in 1900. Collections of facsimile's were published by Lem (1886), Te Mechelen (1905) and Vreede and Gunning (1906).

In the field of lexicography there was no doubt much more progress than in the field of grammatical description. This is testified by the subsequent, very much augmented second and third editions of the Gericke-Roorda lexicon, already discussed above.

Besides publishing various supplements to the Gericke-Roorda dictionary, Jansz also compiled dictionaries which were meant to fulfill practical needs. In 1876 he brought out a Javanese-Dutch dictionary

56 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

in Latin characters. A second very much augmented edition of this dictionary came out shortly after his death, prepared by his son P. A.
Jansz. A reprint of this dictionary, which by its use of Roman characters was rather popular with Dutch students, appeared in 1932. In size as well as in quality it stayed far behind the fourth edition of the GerickeRoorda dictionary.

Jansz with the help of H. C. Klinkert (1861) brought out a DutchJavanese dictionary which replaced the one published by Roorda van Eysinga in 1834. Published first in the form of a pocket dictionary, it was expanded with each new impression much in the same way as his grammar. Its fifth and final impression of 1899 numbered no less than 475 pages. A smaller Dutch-Javanese dictionary was brought out by Grashuis (1898).

Favre's Javanese-French dictionary of 1870 lost all its value already in 1875, being completely based upon the first edition of the GerickeRoorda lexicon of 1847.

By the publication of variegated language material the factual knowledge of the Javanese language was put on a broader and firmer basis.

After Roorda's edition of a collection of official and semi-official letters, Van den Broek published an equally extensive collection of letters written by local authorities from outside the Principalities (1884-1886).

T;jangkriman (= riddles) were published by Kreemer (1883, 1886), and by Poensen in his anthology (1877), while also Van Dorp's Javanese almanac of the years 1870-1875 contained several hundreds of them. Another 250 riddles were published by F. L. Winter (1879). Most important for our knowledge of Javanese riddles are the two monographs by Meyer Ranneft (1893, 1897), the second of which gives the Dutch translation of Winter's riddles.

Wangsalan (a kind of short charades consisting of two lines) are found in Winter's Zamenspraken. Its second volume contains the explanation by Ronggawarsita of the wangsalan and pratjékan (a kind of short parables or homilies) found in two wellknown Javanese literary works, the Rengganis and the serat Tjentini. Later collections of wangsalan were given by Atmasoepana (1897) and also by R. PrawiraJAVANESE 57

winarsa (1920), in one volume with a collection of papal (short maxims with moral tenor) made by M. Soetardja.

Proverbs, sayings, idiomatic expressions, conversations on various everyday topics were supplied by Keyzer (1863), Hoezoo (1865-1895), Jansz (1872), Makoendasastra (1886), Vreede (1878, 1887), Dumont (1905), Padmasoesastra (1911), Sasrakoesoema (1913) and Merta Sendjaja (1883, reprinted in 1913 by Balé Pustaka with Latin characters).
Padmasoesastra composed a Javanese encyclopedia which only partly reached print (1898). Mayer published a number of conversations with Dutch translation modelled after the Sundanese conversations of Kartawinata (1894). Of much higher importance however was his unpretentious but on the whole faithful account of Javanese village life with a description of its material culture which appeared in 1897 in two volumes, enriched by a great number of illustrations and plates. Van den Berg's monograph on ranks and titles in Java and Madura (1887, 2nd ed. 1902) contained useful information. Also Poensen's articles on various aspects of Javanese society, published between 1864 and 1910 mostly in the communications of the Netherlands Missionary Society deserve to be mentioned in this respect.

The phenomenon of different speech-styles depending on social status, kinship and age and implying the use of special vocabularies, a striking feature of the language which from the very beginning of the study of Javanese had attracted much interest, was the subject of quite a number of publications mostly written for practical purposes.
After Winter's conversations and Roorda's edition in 1843 of a number of conversations composed by an anonymous Javanese of Surakarta, several other writers supplied either lists of krama, madya and krama-inggil-terms or conversations expressly made up to illustrate the way these and other special vocabularies, such as the basa kedaton for instance, were used in actual speech. Besides P. A. Jansz' popular treatment of this subject (1883, reprinted in 1898) written in Javanese, Winter Jr's treatise on the special vocabulary used at the Javanese court in Surakarta (1892) meant a useful addition to our knowledge.
Oudemans (1894) and Dirdjaatmadja (1906) also supplied some data on the basa kedaton. In 1897 Walbeehm gave an exhaustive list of the krama and krama inggil terms accepted in the standard dialect of

58 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Surakarta at that time, a list which has retained its value. It was Padmasoesastra however who contributed most to our knowledge on this point by furnishing many excellent data. In this respect not only his Serat Oerapsari (1896), Serat Warnoboso (1900) and Lajang basa Sala (1911) ought to be mentioned, but especially his voluminous Serat Tatatjara (1907) which by its great variety of conversations between people of different social status amply illustrated the subtleties of the actual use of the various speech styles. At the same time he succeeded in giving a lively picture of the life cycle of a Javanese of the prijajiclass in the last quarter of the 19th century. For every student of Javanese it still is a veritable mine of information.

A hypothesis on the origin of these speechstyles or at least of the special vocabularies involved was proposed by H. Kern in 1893.
According to him these vocabularies in their present form could be understood as the result of large scale extension of tabu-words, a phenomenon found in many languages of the Malayo-Polynesian family, as for instance in Achehnese, Ngaju-Dayak, Makasarese, Buginese and Sangirese. This hypothesis was later favourably received by Jonker in his inaugural lecture of 1909 and also apparently by Hazeu who published a number of tabu-words in Javanese (1903).

In four publications (his thesis of 1884, two articles in TBG 32 (1889) and in a letter to the editor of a little known monthly (1886) Brandes expressed himself on the same subject. According to him the krama vocabulary in its present form could not be understood as the result of external causes, such as borrowing of Sanskrit elements as De Hollander (1886) had assumed. Rather it must be considered as a fairly recent and mostly internal development, although some elements might be old. It is interesting to note that in his two TBG-articles Brandes' attitude towards the still observable continuous expansion of the krama vocabulary was one of ill-concealed dislike.

Attention to the phenomenon of borrowing was given by Tjondronegoro, who supplied a list of loanwords which had penetrated into the Javanese language of the region of Kudus (1880). A few years later A. W. T. Juynboll published a list of Javanese loans of Arabic and Persian origin (1883), which was completed by H. H. Juynboll in 1894. In the dictionary of Gericke-Roorda the loans of Sanskrit

JAVANESE 59

origin had been pointed out by H. Kern.

The first attempts to gather some knowledge of the dialects of Java also fall in this period. It was K. F. Holle, wellknown for his Sundanese studies, who took the initiative. In 1864 questionnaires devised by him and containing some 300 items in the Javanese of Surakarta (supplied by W. Palmer van den Broek) were sent out to the residents of the various Javanese-speaking residencies with the request to fill in the dialectal equivalents and to return them to the Batavia Society. As far as I know, the data collected in this way are still kept in the library of the Central Museum in Djakarta.

Data on the Javanese dialects are also found in the account of Raden Mas Arja Poerwalalana's travels on Java published in 1865 and 1866, in the collection of letters of Van den Broek (1884-1886) and in the wordlist of Tjondronegoro (1880), both already mentioned above.
Poensen supplied a list of words in use in East Java (1870), while his anthology Ontjén-ontjén published in 1877 gave some information on the Javanese of Kediri. Two other publications ought to be mentioned here because they also contributed to putting Javanese studies on a somewhat broader basis. Roorda and all other writers of Javanese grammars used to pay only attention to the Javanese as spoken by educated people in the Principalities; not much was known of the Javanese as spoken in the same area by rural and mostly illiterate people. Of this Javanese Ch. te Mechelen (1879) and D. F. van der Pant and R. Padmasoesastra (1885) gave valuable samples. The conversations of Padmasoesastra, already mentioned above, are also highly valuable in this respect.

Important for the further development of Javanese studies, and for Indonesian studies in general, was the fact that in 1864 the Dutch government decided to move the college of Delft to Leiden. Although a municipal training college for civil servants remained in Delft till 1900, Roorda and most other teachers went to Leiden. From this moment onwards the study of Indonesian languages, history and ethnology became intimately connected with the old tradition of the scientific study of Oriental languages for which the university of Leiden was renowned already in the 17th century.

After the death of Roorda, Kern temporarily succeeded him. After

60 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

three years Vreede, Roorda's son-in-law, was appointed professor of Javanese. Vreede's contributions to the grammatical knowledge of Javanese were few and of no great importance. His edition of Roorda's grammar of 1882 (a reprint, without even correction of the misprints), his marginal notes (1887) to Kern's well-known comparative study of the Fidji language and its congeners were criticized by Brandes in a long article in TBG (1889). The most valuable part of Vreede's oeuvre remains his catalogue of the Javanese and Madurese collections of manuscripts in the Leiden university library (1892) and his Madurese contributions which will be discussed elsewhere in this bibliography.
However, even these showed serious shortcomings, mercilessly exposed by Brandes, partly in the same article in TBG, partly in a second one in the same journal (1893) written on the appearance of Vreede's catalogue.
Finally two shorter publications by Vreede have to be mentioned, viz.
his two studies on Javanese word structure, or more exactly on the relation between the Javanese word and its monosyllabic "root", a problem which in a more general form was later frequently discussed in Indonesian comparative linguistics. In his two articles (1885 and 1897, both reprinted in one volume in 1908) Vreede pointed out that these monosyllabic roots assumed to be present in series of Javanese and Malay words of similar meaning were not always of an onomatopoeic nature, as Roorda had assumed. Vreede's view that virtually the whole of the Javanese vocabulary could be analysed into monosyllabic roots and a certain number of affixes which gradually had become petrified, seems untenable. Moreover the linguistic status of these roots was insufficiently understood, not only by Vreede but also by other scholars after him who made use of this concept.

4. JAVANESE STUDIES AFTER 1900

In the period from about 1900 to the present day the study of Javanese language and literature in many of its aspects reached maturity. The most striking advances were made in the field of Javanese philology and cultural history, but also in the linguistic study of present-day Javanese there was quite considerable progress.

JAVANESE 61

In 1901 the fourth edition of the Gericke-Roorda lexicon came out.
It differed from the preceding impressions mainly by the fact that the valuable and extensive lexicographical material collected by Wilkens from 1859 until his death in 1888 could be incorporated by Vreede, who assisted by Gunning, for this edition too served as editor. This led not only to a considerable enlargement of the dictionary but also to an improvement of its reliability.

In the following twenty-five years the relatively rapid exploration of Javanese literature and the resulting increase of lexicographical knowledge necessitated the compilation of a new lexicon. Moreover even in its latest edition the Gericke-Roorda dictionary showed several basic shortcomings. Many data were of a very mixed and unstated provenance, which casts doubt on their reliability. Secondly, omissions were pointed out soon after its appearance (Poensen 1905, Mangkoedimedja 1911).

By the end of 1925 Pigeaud, after the compietion of his Indonesian studies at the university of Leiden, was entrusted by the government with the task of preparing a revision of the dictionary of Gericke and Roorda. In 1926 Pigeaud took up his residence in Surakarta. In 1931 he moved to Jogjakarta From 1926 until 1942, when the second world war made scientific work in Java by European scholars impossible, he worked - assisted by his Javanese staff - at the ambitious project of making an entirely new dictionary, which - if completed would have become a fully adequate source of information for the reading of most if not all the Javanese literature then known. At the same time he intended to include newly collected data from various Javanese dialects. In 1938 Pigeaud published a very much abbreviated version of the lexicon as he had planned it. Already this modestly sized but highly condensed dictionary has proved to be an indispensable tool for the understanding of many literary texts, old and new alike.
Although it cannot be said to make the consulting of the GerickeRoorda dictionary wholly superfluous, it certainly means a great advance by its reliability and by its short but in general highly felicitous and accurate Dutch translations of the Javanese lemmas.

In order to get more precise information about special sections of the Javanese vocabulary Pigeaud considered it wise to make detailed

62 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

investigations of various aspects of Javanese culture and encouraged others to do likewise. He himself published, as a kind of preparatory study to his lexicographical work, his monumental Javaanse volksvertoningen (= Javanese folk entertainments) which by its careful description of the various forms of shows, travelling orchestras, mummeries and other popular performances was a very welcome contribution to our knowledge of Javanese culture. Overbeck published an account of Javanese girls' games and songs of children (1939), while Tjan Tjoe Siem gave a description of Javanese card games (1941). After the war Pigeaud, who had repatriated in 1946, did not return to Java to resume his lexicological activities. Fortunately his enormous and unique material, collected in nearly 17 years of study, survived the hazards of war. It was transferred to the linguistic institute in Djakarta. As far as I know, no plans are being made to complete the work to which Pigeaud had devoted so many years of his life.

In the Netherlands Pigeaud published a Javanese-Dutch and DutchJavanese pocket dictionary (1948). In the same year his Dutch-Javanese dictionary came out, a companion volume of his Javanese-Dutch dictionary of 1938. It superseded the older Dutch-Javanese dictionary of Jansz mentioned above.

Shortly after Pigeaud's Javanese-Dutch dictionary came off the press, the first Javanese-Javanese dictionary compiled by W. J. S. Poerwadarminta was published (1939) as the result of many years of careful lexicographical work. It was the first extensive publication by this prominent Javanese lexicographer. Already in 1930 its first half (letters A-L) had appeared in a preliminary edition in Jogjakarta. With help received from various quarters (in the first place from Pigeaud) Poerwadarminta was able to complete his dictionary early in 1937.
A concise Indonesian-Javanese dictionary also by Poerwadarminta came out in 1942 (reprinted in 1943 and 1945). Its publication was needed, as the Malay-Javanese dictionary of R. Sasrasoeganda of 1916 (reprinted in 1922), although useful at the time of its appearance, had become obsolete. A Javanese-Javanese pocket dictionary was published by Poerwadarminta in 1946.

From 1890 until the beginning of the second world war gradually more data on the Javanese dialects became available, mostly consisting

JAVANESE 63

of more or less extensive wordlists, to which sometimes a few grammatical remarks or short texts were added. Going from west to east we make mention of Mangoen di Karia's monograph on the Javanese of Banten (1914) which received a reward from the Board of the Batavia Society of Arts and Sciences, which had offered prizes for the best contribution to the knowledge of the Javanese dialects, of Smith's meritorious description of the dialect of Tjerebon (1926), of which Groneman had already supplied a wordlist (1893). On the same dialect, Van Dapperen (1933), Hadisartama (1958) and Ismail (1959) also contributed some data. The manuscript of the code of law of Tjerebon of 1768, published by Hazeu in 1905, is however a much more important source for this dialect. It is doubtful whether the version of the Babad Tjerebon together with many notes found in Brandes' papers and published by Rinkes (1911) contains much that is of interest for the study of this dialect. For the dialect of Tegal the most important source is the monograph by Walbeehm (1903) which completely superseded the short wordlist compiled by Knebel in 1900. For the closely related dialect of Banjumas, Rhemrev's "Gurma Lelana" (1884) and Esser's monograph (1927), also a prize essay, are virtually the only sources. Recent tape-recordings of stories told by my former Banjumas informant, R. Soejono, have not yet been published. Of the Javanese of Pekalongan a short wordlist has been published by Vooren in 1892. Of importance for the Javanese of the whole of central Java outside of the Principalities is the rather extensive wordlist by De Nooy and Padmasoesastra (1893). Information has become available on the dialect of Djapara thanks to Walbeehm. In 1895 and 1897 this industrious scholar published two studies on this dialect. Of these two, the one published in 1897 is clearly the most valuable, because in it Walbeehm compared dialectal materials received from various Javanese informants. It was a first attempt to survey all the dialects of the North of Central Java, the so-called pasisir-area. The wordlist compiled by him numbered more than 1000 items. Important for our knowledge of this pasisir-Javanese is Rd. Moehamad Jakoeb's detailed description of seafishing along the north coast (1913). Of the Javanese spoken in and around Surabaja a few data were supplied by Kats (1912, 1916) and Overbeck (1930), while Van Hinloopen

64 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Labberton devoted a short monograph to the Javanese of the MalangPasuruan area (1900). Recently Prijanggana furnished some data on the Javanese of Banjuwangi (1957). Mayer published four short texts in the dialect of Patjitan in the residency of Madiun with a Dutch translation (1893).

In a few cases short texts of various Javanese dialects were given, accompanied with some grammatical notes. Of these we mention Mas Samsir Miardja's Laojang néka tatoer Djawa (1917) which contains short conversations in the dialects of Rembang and Pekalongan, Kats' Serat Warna Sari Djawi (1929) which contains short dialogues in the Javanese of Surakarta, Jogjakarta, Kebumén, Banjumas, Sukawati, Madiun, Pasuruan, Kediri, Surabaja, Probolinggo, Butuh (Kutoardja), Banten, Kudus, Blora and Tengger and Mardjana's meritorious Lajang ist kawroeh bab basa Djawa sawetara (= Book containing some knowledge concerning the Javanese language), which gave short texts written in nine different dialects (1. Surabaja, Malang, Pasuruan, 2. Semarang, 3. Blora, 4. Brebes, Tegal, Pekalongan, 5. Banjumas, Bagelén, 6. Madiun, Kediri, 7. Banten, 8. Indramaju, Tjerebon, 9. Banjuwangi), accompanied with some grammatical observations (1933).

A number of dialectal data concerning technical terminologies are found in the voluminous official reports which embody the results of the detailed inquiries into the land rights of the population of Java and Madura (Eindresumé 3 vols. 1876, 1880 and 1896), into the decline of its standard of life (Hasselman 1904, 1905) and into the onerousness and the extent of the village corvées (Fokkens 3 vols. 1902, 1903, Hasselman 1905).

It stands to reason that in spite of all these contributions the need for reliable and detailed information on the Javanese dialects has scarcely become less urgent.

No studies except Smith's monograph on the dialect of Tjerebon contained any map or made any attempt to give a precise indication of the area in which the dialect under discussion was spoken. Virtually no phonetic data or isoglosses were given, in short there was no visible influence of modern methods of dialect study as had been developed in Western Europe since Gilli¢ron. This was partly caused by the fact that in this period linguistic studies were mostly undertaken by

JAVANESE 65

laymen, who were completely unaware of what was happening in linguistics elsewhere. To fill this deplorable gap in our linguistic information concerning the three languages of Java, in 1938 Berg started a systematic study of the whole Sundanese-Javanese speaking area. During a period of concentrated fieldwork, and by travelling all over Java, he succeeded in making hundreds of gramophone recordings containing samples of the speech of numerous Javanese and Sundanese speakers of different social status and occupation. Unfortunately the gramophone records were destroyed during the war; a number of transcripts made by Javanese assistants were saved, but none of them has been published thus far. Neither the extensive data on the dialect of Banjuwangi collected by Pigeaud before the second world war did reach print.

After the war a number of tape-recordings of several Javanese dialects (Semarang, Gresik, Surabaja) have been made in the Netherlands; we mentioned already the recordings in the dialect of Banjumas.
They form part of a collection of tapes kept at the university of Leiden.

As to Javanese grammar new descriptive efforts were made by the missionary Poensen (1897) and by the civil servant Walbeehm (1896, 1897) who in 1893 was appointed teacher of Javanese at the Gymnasium Willem III in Batavia. Both descriptions were again based on the dialect of Surakarta, which being considered by the Javanese themselves as the language in its purest and richest form, was officially accepted by the government in 1893 as the form of Javanese to be taught at school.

The authors of these two grammars, although not schooled linguists, had a solid first hand knowledge of the language. They proved able to give an account of many phenomena which was often correct, or rather as correct as their theoretical framework allowed. In contradistinction to much recent work by modern descriptivists who take pride in basing themselves on more up to date theoretical insights, but whose descriptive results are often surprisingly low in factual content, one is tempted to state that people like Poensen and Walbeehm knew the language they wanted to describe without knowing linguistics.
While Poensen's grammar in several respects showed the influence of Tendeloo and Fokker Sr., although on the whole still closely

5

66 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

adhering to the Roorda tradition, Walbeehm - conscious of the necessity of basing his description on the spoken language - tried at least partly to free himself of the influence of his predecessors. In his grouping of the facts he followed the Dutch grammar of Terwey, one of the bestknown of the traditional type.

Walbeehm first published preliminary descriptions of Javanese word formation (1895), soundsystem and script (1896), then brought out his book on Javanese speech styles already mentioned above (1897) followed in the same year by a detailed description of Javanese morphology.
The first three publications were meant to constitute a more or less complete grammer. In 1905 a condensed version of them came out in one volume.

In the form of articles no contribution of real importance for the description of Javanese appeared in this period. Not without value were Knebel's "Varia Javanica" (1901) which gave some information on Javanese thieves-language, and Smith's article on types of abbreviation, an often neglected subject (1909). Jasawijata and Kartadarmadja published some specimens of secret language (1921), Inggris in a short article gave a few data on tabu words in Bageléen (1921), while in an anonymous article which also appeared in the first volume of the newly founded journal Djdw&é a collection of words and short phrases on Javanese as used in school, was published (1921).

Four years after Walbeehm's second edition, Kiliaan's grammar (1919) was published, the last attempt thus far to give a full-length description of Standard Javanese within the covers of one book. It cannot be denied that is showed originality and independence from its predecessors. Especially the treatment of the Javanese verb and the far greater attention given to the language in its spoken form meant a departure from the Roorda tradition. The value of Kiliaan's grammar mainly lies in his excellent and abundant illustrative material taken from the language as it was actually used. It is to be regretted that this admirable feature did not prevent him from introducing into his description distinctions clearly foreign to the language in question.
Moreover his work is seriously marred by the unfounded, often utterly fantastic quasi-historical explanations found on nearly every page.

Although from about 1900 onwards an increasing number of

JAVANESE 67

practical introductions to Javanese appeared which will be discussed below, the scientific study of present-day Javanese did not make any significant advance in the twenty years following the publication of Kiliaan's grammar. At the university of Leiden, Jonker, the successor of Vreede in the chair of Javanese language and literature (1909), although a first rate linguist and wellknown for his detailed descriptions of East Indonesian languages, did not make any contribution to the study of modern Javanese, in spite of the fact that his inaugural lecture (1909) in which he gave a survey of the history of Javanese studies, clearly proved that he was well aware of the shortcomings of the existing Javanese grammars. In 1920 Jonker was succeeded by Hazeu, a scholar who was predominantly interested in problems of Javanese law, folklore and cultural history. Owing to ill-health he had to resign already in 1928. Although a philologist by training, his successor, Berg, felt compelled to turn his attention to the linguistic study of the language, in order to be able to present his many Dutch students (nearly all future civil servants for whom Javanese was at that time a compulsory subject) with better linguistic information than the grammar of Kiliaan and those of his predecessors provided. Three linguistic publications appeared within a period of four years; first in 1937 his voluminous monograph on Javanese verbal forms, followed by a short article also on certain characteristics of the Javanese verb (1938) and finally a long article on the spelling of Javanese and Madurese in which he gave a description of the sound system of both languages (1941).

Of these three publications, the last one is the most valuable. His monograph of 1937 suffers from the fact that its factual basis was insufficient. Instead of collecting new material, Berg mainly took into account morphological data found in Gericke-Roorda's dictionary, which as the author himself stated at the end of his monograph, could not serve as a firm foundation for morphological studies. Secondly his largely speculative approach could hardly lead to reliable results. It seemed as if the author was bent on arbitrarily creating a certain order of his own among the facts, instead of patiently investigating how the facts were really systematically ordered. Moreover no sharp distinction was maintained between synchronic and diachronic processes. It was therefore not surprising that Berg's monograph elicited strongly voiced,

68 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

but certainly not unjustified criticism from Gonda. First in a BKI article of 1943, and later in a long article in the same journal which owing to war conditions was only published in 1949, Gonda pointed out various weaknesses of the book, stressing factual shortcomings as well as theoretical ones. Berg's short article in the Baader-festschrift (1938) does not require any further comments, being written in the same vein as the monograph. For the same reason there is no need to go into Wils' study on the so-called passive verb in Indonesian languages (1952). His speculations, as far as Javanese is concerned, are almost exclusively based on Berg's monograph. The importance of Berg's article on the spelling of Javanese and Madurese published shortly before the war (1941) derives from the fact that in it the first attempt is made to give a phonemic analysis of the sound system of the two languages. On the basis of these analyses he was able to criticise the new spelling devised for Madurese by the provincial educational authorities of East Java and to formulate certain new proposals for a more adequate spelling of Javanese and Madurese.

Next to Berg's linguistic efforts, a number of other studies appeared in this period which ought to be mentioned here. Bijleveld, in his thesis of 1943, collected a large quantity of interesting but heterogeneous material on the highly varied duplication and reduplication phenomena in Malay, Javanese and Sundanese, not being able however, to reach valuable results because of the non-functional method followed by him.
Without any value are Haag's "Der Ausdruck der Denkordnung im Javanischen" (1939) and Loeb's "Javanese Word Formation, High and Low" (1944). Both publications, which betray an appalling lack of knowledge of the most elementary facts, do not give the reader any fruitful insight or any new information.

On an altogether different level are the two highly interesting articles published by De Casparis in 1947 and 1948. The first one discussed a striking feature of the language, viz. the predominance of non-affixed words containing two vowels. The second, much longer, one pointed out with the help of abundant material, the important role played by rhyming binomials of various types. It is to be regretted that this article, rich as it is in content, is not quite free from unwarranted speculation, for instance when a relation is posited between

JAVANESE 69

the structure of the Javanese vowel system and cosmologic and other classifications, operative in Javanese culture.

The general problem of the relation between language structure and metrics was the subject of the inaugural lecture by Teeuw (1952), in which he mostly discussed Javanese and Malay data. Two years later Slamet Muljana took up the same problem (and at the same time many others more or less related to it) in his thesis, which was badly organized and conspicuous for its lack of method. It was severely criticized by Teeuw in an important constructive review in BKI (1955).
Slamet Muljana also discussed the vexed problem of the nature and the origin of the names of the various types of Javanese metre, to which Berg had paid attention as early as 1928 in his introduction to Old Javanese. Slamet Muljana made some interesting suggestions without, however, probing into the matter very deeply. For those interested in these and related problems Mas Hardjowirogo's unpretentious introduction to Javanese metrics written in Javanese (1926, reprinted in 1952) still provides reliable information.

The phenomenon of the special vocabularies continued to attract the attention of various scholars. Gonda wrote an article on "the vocabulary of courtesy" in Lingua 1948, attempting to place the Javanese phenomena within the broader framework of Indonesian and general linguistics.
He also disagreed with Kern's theory of the tabu origin of these vocabularies. In contrast to Gonda's approach, the writer of this bibliography in his discussion of the same subject confined himself to the Javanese facts in order to be able to determine their place within the structure of the language (1950). In the same year Damais wrote a useful introductory essay on the Javanese forms of politeness, intended for French readers who were not familiar with the language.
Finally, Slamet Muljana in his thesis of 1954 again took up the hypothesis already to be found in Berg's introduction to Old-Javanese of 1928, that the development of the krama vocabularies could be at least partly explained by the exigencies of Javanese metrics.

It is perhaps not superfluous to point out that in the course of this century the phenomenon of the special vocabularies became a hotly debated issue. Many Dutch-educated Javanese intellectuals had lost the ability to use the subtle distinctions of their mother-tongue with any

H

70 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

sort of confidence. Moreover the important social changes in Java sometimes made it an extremely difficult matter to define the social position of one's speech-partner in relation to one's own, while this is an absolute prerequisite for the correct choice of lexical items, forms of address etc. There always had been a certain interest in language matters among the Javanese of the prijaji class. From about 1910 however a new movement developed in Java, the Djawadipa movement, which strongly advocated the abolition of the krama vocabulary. This caused sharp reactions among the Javanese prijaji. Animated discussions were held on this and other socially important language problems, as for instance the place of Javanese relative to Dutch and Malay, the value of Javanese script as part of the Javanese cultural heritage, the role of Javanese in education, the question whether there was any truth in the assertion often heard in certain quarters that the Javanese language (and perhaps more in general Javanese culture) was on the decline. Later on many of these discussions took place within the framework of the congresses organized by the Java Institute, established in 1919 in Surakarta for the promotion of indigenous cultural life in Java, Madura and Bali. Within the period 1919-1929 five general meetings took place: Surakarta '19, Bandung '21, Jogja '24, Surabaja '26, Surakarta ©'29, and four language congresses, two on the Sundanese language: Bandung '24 and '27, two on Javanese: Surakarta '24, Jogja '27. With the exception of the proceedings of the first congress which were published separately (see in the bibliography s.v.
Handelingen), the preliminary reports and the proceedings of these congresses can be found in the journal Djdwd which was founded by the Java Institute in 1921. This well-edited and profusely illustrated journal exclusively devoted to the culture of Java and Madura appeared regularly up to the Japanese occupation in 1942. It has been extremely valuable for the furthering of the study of Javanese in its broader sense. It is true that its twenty-one stately volumes only rarely contained articles of a purely linguistic nature, but this does not alter the fact that by shedding light on the most diverse aspects of Javanese cultural life, past and present, the journal very materially contributed to our lexicological knowledge and also greatly facilitated our understanding of many literary works. A very useful index of the contents of vol. 1-20

JAVANESE 71

of this journal and of other publications of the Java Institute, made by Pigeaud was published in two volumes (1931 and 1941).

Another initiative of the Java Institute, the founding of periodicals Poesaka Djawi, Poesaka Soenda and Posaka Madhoera (1922-'24) did not meet with the same amount of success as Only Poesaka Djawi, of which 15 volumes appeared, may be said to have flourished ; Poesaka Soenda already ceased to exist in 1929, while Posaka Madhoera only appeared during the first six months of 1924. The three journals cannot be consulted in Dutch public libraries. An index of their contents was also made by Pigeaud (1937).

A great number of articles published by Gonda from 1935 onwards in BKI, Lingua and other journals certainly deserve to be mentioned here, although they do not deal primarily with Javanese. Predominantly being of a comparative nature, they do not limit themselves to one single Indonesian language, but mostly discuss various morphonological, morphological and syntactical features deemed characteristic for Indonesian languages in general or for a certain group among them. Always of scientific interest and always amply documented - one is sometimes inclined to say, too amply in view of the nature of the problems raised they have the drawback that they only rarely rest on freshly collected data, but mainly make use of what can be found in printed, that is, not always reliable and often highly incomplete sources.

Although one may quarrel about the question which of Gonda's many valuable contributions to Indonesian linguistics is the most important from the point of view of the study of Javanese, it is clear that in spite of certain shortcomings inevitable in a work of such a wide scope (indicated by Teeuw in his review in BKI (1956)) Gonda's impressive study of Sanskrit loanwords in Indonesian languages (1952) is of the highest value for Javanese linguists and philologists alike.

Criticism has been levelled at some of Gonda's publications, namely by Trager in 1948 in IJAL on the appearance of the first issue of Lingua, which contained an abbreviated version of Gonda's long article on the applicability of the historical-comparative method in MalayoPolynesian languages in BKI, and by Dyen in 1956 in JAOS in his review of Gonda's Sanskrit in Indonesia. Both objected to the use of the term "primitive languages", completely overlooking the fact that

72 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Gonda used this term in a sense which had nothing to do with the condemnable pejorative use of this term in linguistic and anthropological literature before 1925.

As translation from various languages into Javanese frequently occurred, a certain interest in translation problems arose, in the first place in relation to the translation of the Bible and in preaching (Jansz 1901, Van Lith 1921). More recently problems related to Bible translation were discussed by Swellengrebel in The Bible Translator, journal of the United Bible Societies (1953, 1955; see also the report of the Bible translators Conference, held at Djakarta in 1952, in the same journal). The importance of translation as a means of discussing certain syntactic features peculiar to Javanese was shown by Uhlenbeck (1941).

From 1949 onwards the author of this bibliography, who at the end of that year succeeded Berg in the Leiden chair of Javanese language and literature, has been engaged in the ambitious project of providing a new and more or less exhaustive or at least very detailed description of Standard Javanese, assuming that such a description would not only be useful within the framework of Indonesian linguistics, but also might constitute a contribution to general linguistics. To realise the goal set by him he makes use not only of information elicited from informants, but also utilizes the important and numerous written data supplied by the many Javanese publications of Balé Pustaka, the Bureau for popular literature.

Immediately after the war he wrote a detailed description of Javanese morphonology and phonology which appeared in 1949. From 1953 onwards in a series of articles published in various journals and in a monograph he described various morphological phenomena. Thus far only two subsystems of the morphology have been treated more or less exhaustively, the numerals in an article in BKI (1953), and more recently the pronouns (1960). In the other article on morphology attention is given to the Javanese verb and to other wordclasses. An extensive collection of materials still awaits publication. Uhlenbeck's phonemic analysis of the Javanese word system, which largely runs parallel with the one earlier given by Berg, is apparently rejected first by Dyen, as may be gathered from his reply to Gonda's rejoinder to his review of Gonda's Sanskrit in Indonesia in JAOS (1956), and later

JAVANESE 73

also by Kamil, who in BKI wrote an on the whole favourable review of Uhlenbeck's monograph on the Javanese pronominal system (1962).
This monograph was also rather critically reviewed by Hendon in JAOS (1962), which is not surprising in view of the fundamental differences in linguistic theory between the distributionalistic point of view of the reviewer and the position of Uhlenbeck which at least in certain respects comes closer to opinions held by the Prague School and its continuers.

More recently the study of Javanese, which in this century had been mainly pursued by Dutch scholars, came to attract more attention from scholars from other countries. Catford contributed to the phonetic knowledge of the Javanese consonantal system in his article on the nature of the distinction between the two series of stops (1961). Mrs.
Horne published in 1961 "Beginning Javanese", an extensive elementary course which claimed to offer a new and complete analysis of Javanese phonology and grammar. A second volume, called "Intermediate Javanese", which contains conversations and stories with English translations, a Javanese-English and an English-Javanese Glossary, appeared in 1963. "Beginning Javanese" was critically reviewed by Uhlenbeck in Lingua (1963), after having found a more favourable reception in other reviews (Teeter in Language 39 (1963), Denzel Carr in Journal of Asian Studies 21 (1962), R. S. Hendon in the American Anthropologist (1963) and Hooykaas in Orientalistische Literaturszeitung (1964)). Recently Teselkin wrote a short introduction to the language in Russian (1963).

No important new contributions to the study of modern Javanese by Indonesian linguists seem to have been made after the second world war. The journals Bahasa dan Budaja and Medan Bahasa founded in 1950 and 1952 resp. only very rarely contain articles on Javanese, while TBG ceased to appear, its last issue being of 1957. We have already mentioned the short contributions to Javanese dialect study by Ismail and Prijanggana. We may add here Tardjan Hadidjaja's three articles on the reciprocal influence of Javanese and Bahasa Indonesia (1951-1952), Soetikno's elementary introduction to Javanese script (1953), Ukun Surjaman's article on Javanese and Sundanese kinship (1956) and Trajono's report of certain marriage ceremonies in TjilatJjap

74 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

(1959). I had no opportunity to consult Prawiroatmodjo's study on the similarity of Javanese and Bahasa Indonesia (1953). As recent information about what is published in Indonesia is rather difficult to obtain, it may very well be that some publications have escaped my attention. In periodicals outside of Indonesia we may mention Sumukti's short article in Language Learning on Sundanese and Javanese phonic interference in relation to learning English (1958). Finally M.A. theses were written by Samsuri on Javanese phonology, and by Sutardijah Kromowidarso on the morphological structure of Javanese verbs, both written during their stay at the university of Indiana in Bloomington (personal communication from professor F. W. Householder).

Beside the grammars and grammatical studies written with a scientific purpose, practical manuals, primers and introductions to the language started to appear in greater numbers from about 1900 onwards, as the spread of education. the establishment of many new schools and in general the closer and more frequent and varied contacts between the Dutch-speaking stratum of society and the Javanese population tended to increase the demand for teaching materials of widely varying scope and aims. One does not serve any scientific purpose by trying to list them all here. We will limit ourselves to the more important and extensive ones.

Various grammars and books written in Javanese by Javanese authors appeared, in which all kinds of topics related to the Javanese language were discussed. They were mostly influenced by the Dutch grammars existing at the time of their publication. Beside the grammar of Ronggowarsito published by Padmasoesastra already mentioned before, Padmasoesastra's Lajang Paromoboso appeared as early as 1897-1898 (3 vol. with a separately printed index). Other Javanese grammars were: M. Ng. Dwidjasewaja's Lajang paramasastra Djawa kanggo ing pamoelangan Djawa (2 vol. 1908-1914 twice reprinted) and Serat tatasastra published by a literary circle in Surakarta (1911). A short Javanese grammar for self-tuition was made by M. More recent are K. M. Sasrasoemarta's much more elementary introduction Boeboekaning paramasastra Djawi kanggé moerid ing pamoelangan angka kalih (1933), and W. J. S. Poerwadarminta's Sarining parameJAVANESE 75

sastra Djawa (1953) which could not be consulted, not being available in this country.

Of the Javanese books which treat various linguistic and sometimes literary topics we ought to make mention of Padmasoesastra's valuable treatise, called Serat Patibasa, mainly containing a detailed discussion of Javanese synonyms, published in 1912; Samsirmiardja's Lajang néka t;atoer Djawa (1917); Kats' Serat Warne Sari Djawi (2nd ed.
1929) and Mardjana's Lajang ist kawroeh bab basa Djawa sawetara (1933), all three already mentioned above because of their samples of Javanese dialects; Kats-Hadiwidjana's T;engkorongan kawroeh kasoesastran Djawi meant for use in Javanese teachers training colleges (1934), and Padmasoekotjo's Sariné basa Djawa (1956), which is mainly an ordered list of synonyms.

For use by Dutch students of the language a number of more or less elementary grammatical introductions, sometimes with wordlists, and with short conversations with Dutch translation aimed at bringing out the differences in speech-style, were published by Pieters (1903), Dumont (1905), Van der Valk (1909, a very much augmented and revised edition of his introduction of 1892), Bezemer (1912), Kats (1912), Nimpoeno and Nauta (1930, 1938, 1947), Prijohoetomo (1937), Mittelstadt (1938) and Uhlenbeck (1941). Roskes supplied a list of krama-inggil words (1912), while Van Hinloopen Labberton illustrated the use of krama and ngoko elements with the help of a great number of sentences (1912).

Bezemer's booklet forms part of a set of very elementary manuals (exercises, wordlist) published earlier (1900), which between the two wars was sometimes used in the Netherlands as a first introduction to the language. The one composed by Kats became in its second edition a manual in three volumes containing many exercises and conversations written by M. Koesrin, later editor-in-chief of the Javanese section of Balé Pustaka, who became coauthor of vol. 1 and vol. 3 of this enlarged and completely revised second edition (1921-1927). Kats employed a terminology of his own, which however only acted as a kind of disguise for the more familiar traditional terminology, without reflecting a really different approach. His manual is still useful, because of the excellent Javanese material contributed by Koesrin.

76 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

Prijohoetomo, for some years lecturer in Javanese at the university of Utrecht, later teacher of Javanese and Malay at the trainingcollege for superintendents and commissioners of police in Sukabumi, published his useful, but on the whole traditional grammar in the same year (1937) as his collection of Javanese letters and his Javanese reader ; the three books together may be said also to form a set of teaching materials, far superior to Bezemer's manuals.

Uhlenbeck's grammatical introduction (1941), also meant for use in Javanese teachers training colleges and in the secondary school in Jogjakarta where Javanese and Malay were both compulsory subjects, has hardly any scientific value, except perhaps for the material included in the second half of the book which was wholly devoted to the discussion of various sentence-types defined on the basis of their intonation.

In the period between the two world wars Kats, with the help of a few Javanese assistants, published a number of manuals and anthologies, some of them devised for use in Javanese schools, others meant for Dutch students. Beside his grammar and his Serat Warne Sari Djawi - mentioned above - he gave an anthology of Javanese prose in two volumes in Javanese characters (1908-1910, reprinted in 1922). An anthology of Javanese poetry under the title Poespawarni appeared in 1926 composed by a group of Javanese teachers under the direction of Kats.

Numerous are also the booklets on Javanese script. They were published i.a. by Poensen (1893), Padmasoesastra (1897), Kats (1907), Dumont (1915), Nimpoeno (1936), Noordenbos (1941), Samoed Sastrowardojo (1954). In 1918 official rules for the spelling of Javanese with Latin characters were given (Spellingstelsels 1918). In 1926 rules were drawn up for the spelling with Javanese characters made by a committee of Javanese men of letters in Surakarta (Warwaton 1926). Pigeaud wrote a short popular article on the various scripts used for the writing of Javanese in the memorial volume published in honour of the 56th birthday of Mangkoenagoro VII (1939).

It is out of the question to attempt to list here all the Javanese books published thus far. A glance in the printed catalogue of the Javanese books of the library of the former Batavia Society which was compiled by R. Poerwasoewignja and R. Wirawangsa in 1921,

JAVANESE 77

is already sufficient to understand that to give such a list would not serve any useful purpose. Moreover from 1908 onwards, after the founding of Balé Pustaka (the Bureau for popular literature) the number of Javanese printed books sharply increased. The establishment of this bureau was necessitated by the steady increase of the number of people who had learned to read, but for whom hardly any reading matter was available for keeping up their recently acquired proficiency.
Roughly speaking the publications of Balé Pustaka fall into four categories: 1) printed editions of Javanese literary works or modern adaptations of them, 2) original works written by Javanese authors, 3) translations of all sorts of books mostly written in Dutch, English and Malay, 4) elementary schoolbooks, practical manuals and guides concerning the most diverse subjects. As many of them are written by Javanese authors for Javanese readers they constitute an important source for our knowledge of the present-day language. After the second world war Balé Pustaka only rarely published Javanese books. Other publishers of Javanese books have been Van Dorp in Semarang, Tan Khoen Swie in Kediri and Kolff-Buning in Jogja. Schoolbooks have been published in the Netherlands by the firms of Wolters and of Noordhoff.

Many of these Javanese books which were so easily available before the second world war, are now extremely difficult to obtain. It stands to reason that in the Netherlands the university library of Leiden and the library of the Royal Institute of Linguistics and Anthropology in The Hague, and in Indonesia the library of the Central Museum in Djakarta have very rich, if not complete collections of at least the Balé Pustaka publications. After the second world war Mas Samoed Sastrowardojo, Mas Mardjana, R. Wignjadisastra, A. S. Tjitrosomo and others did much to furnish a more or less complete new set of schoolbooks (1949-1956). As they may be still available, their titles are inserted in the bibliography. For the same reason mention is made here of a few useful anthologies of modern present-day Javanese: Drewes, with Javanese-Dutch wordlist (1946); S. Sastrasoewignja's Kembar Majang in 4 vol. by Balé Pustaka (1936-1952) and Mellema's Modern Javaansch Proga (1933).

A rich source for the knowledge of Javanese are the Javanese news78 LANGUAGES OF JAVA AND MADURA

papers and periodicals published in Java for nearly a century. It seems that the first Javanese journal was the Bramartani (1855). It proved impossible to list here all the Javanese newspapers, weeklies, monthlies etc. which appeared from that date. Many of them were very shortlived ; most of them have not reached the libraries. Information on the rather extensive, but far from complete collection of old Javanese newspapers kept at the library of Djakarta can be gathered from Poerwasoewignja's useful survey (1911) and by Drewes' article in the journal Koloniale Studién (1934). In the Netherlands a collection of Javanese newspapers is kept at the Royal Library in The Hague. The university library of Leiden has some of the older newspapers (Djoeroe Martani, Bramartani and Darmakanda), but no complete sets. Both this library and the library of the Royal Institute of Linguistics and Anthropology possess the periodicals published by Balé Pustaka, of which in particular the bi-weekly Kadjawen (1925-1942) ought to be mentioned, being one of the most important sources of present-day Javanese. Other journals which appeared before the second world war include: Darmakanda, entirely in Javanese characters, which appeared more or less regularly from about 1904 onwards, Sedyatama, Panjebar Semangat and finally Eksprés, published in Surabaja and entirely edited in ngoko. No exact data on Javanese post-war newspapers and journals are available.
A number of them, mostly weeklies have been published for a shorter or longer period of time; some still exist. I have had access to copies of the following journals : T;andra (+ 1949) and Pantja Sila (+ 1957), both published in Semarang; the monthly Kedjawén (+ 1950) and the weekly Panjebar Semangat which still appeared in 1950, both published in Surabaja; Wiwara Tama (+ 1949), a weekly from Banjumas, and in Jogja the weeklies Dirgahaju (+ 1951) and Waspada (+ 1954), and finally the catholic Prabae which started as a journal published every fortnight, but which now comes out every ten days.

Finally data important mainly for our lexicographical knowledge and for the history of the study of Javanese are furnished by various compendia and numerous ethnographic and cultural historical monographs. We can only mention here a few of them. For the understanding of botanical terms Heyne's four volumes on useful plants in the DutchJAVANESE 79

Indies (1913-1917), De Clereqg's Botanical Dictionary (1909, 2nd ed.
1927) and Ochse's series of publications on the cultivation of vegetables and fruits (1924, '25, '27), mostly published by Balé Pustaka, are rich sources. Van Hien's De Javaansche Geestenwereld (vol. 1 1894, vol.
1-4 1896) contains useful information on Javanese chronology and the various beliefs and calculations related with it. For Javanese musical terminology Kunst's fundamental study of Javanese music (1934, second, English edition 1949) is a rich source.

For terms pertaining to customary law we refer to the collections of customary law (Adatrecht-bundels 1910-1955) especially those which are devoted wholly or in part to the Javanese speaking areas (vol. 2, 4, 8, 10, 12, 14, 18, 19, 22, 23, 25, 28 and 34). No less important are Van Vollenhoven's monumental volumes on customary law in the Netherlands-Indies (1918-1933) and the publications of several of his pupils, like for instance Soepomo's monograph on customary civil law of West Java (1933). Furthermore Van Hinloopen Labberton's dictionary of customary law (1934) ought to be mentioned. The recent publications of Koentjaraningrat (1957, 1960) and C. and H. Geertz (1960, 61) are of importance, amongst other things, for Javanese kinship terminology.

For our knowledge of various aspects of Javanese life Veth's Javea (3 vol. 1875-1882, 2nd ed. 1896-1907) has lost its value. It has been replaced by Lekkerkerker's compendium (1938) which still has a certain amount of usefulness. The eight stately volumes of the second edition of the Encyclopaedia of the Netherlands East Indies (19171940) contain a wealth of information on Java under Dutch rule.
