# The Southeast Asian Ship: An Historic Approach

Pierre-Yves Manguin

This article will concentrate on one aspect of a major question in Southeast Asian maritime history: an attempt will be made to describe and determine the origins of the type of ship that was the main form of transport for the trade of the maritime kingdoms of the western half of Southeast Asia until the arrival of the Europeans in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Surprisingly enough — if the general importance of the commercial network of maritime Southeast Asia is considered — such a study has not yet been attempted. The very few authors dealing with the economic history of the region are usually content to dismiss the problem by saying that the ships are locally called “junks”, and that their tonnage is small. (The reader is thus left with the idea that Chinese ships were being used, since the word “junk” has long been applied almost exclusively to this very specific type of ship.)[^1] The general conclusion of this study is that Southeast Asian maritime powers built, owned, and operated ocean-going ships of respectable size as early as the first few centuries of the first millennium A.D. Needless to say, this has a considerable historical significance (which will not be examined here).

The present work was initiated by the discovery of some converging descriptions of Indonesian ships in sixteenth-century Portuguese sources. All of these referred to a trading ship which was called junco by the Portuguese, an obvious and regular transcription of the Malay jong. The latter is often to be found in Malay literary sources from the sixteenth century onwards (in the Sejarah Melayu, for instance),[^2] but, as far as I know, no technical information at all may be gathered from these texts. Whether the words junco, jongue, junk, etc., came to be used in European languages during the sixteenth century — owing to the large diffusion of Portuguese texts — or earlier, after it was first divulged in the travelogues of Odoric de Pordenone, Marco Polo, and the like, its Malay origin no longer needs to be demonstrated. (Its derivation from the Chinege ch’uan 船 should not be retained.)[^3]

As soon as they arrived in Asian waters, the Portuguese were confronted with these jong, which — to their surprise — were more often than not larger than their own naus.[^4] Very soon, they gained first-hand knowledge of these ships by making extensive use of them in their own trading ventures in Asian waters from India to China.[^5]

As it entered the Straits of Malacca for the first time, the fleet of Governor Alfonso de Albuquerque fought against a jong belonging to the harbour-town. of Pasai, on the northeastern coast of Sumatra. The event is described by Gaspar Correia, a sixteenth-century Portuguese chronicler:[^6]

>Seeing that the *junco* wanted to start fighting, the Governor got close to her with his whole fleet. The galleys started shooting at her, but this did not affect her in the least, and she went on sailing... The Portuguese ships then shot at her masts, ... and she dropped her sails. Because she was very tall[^7] ..., our people did not dare board her and our firing did not hurt her at all, for she had four superimposed layers of planks, and our biggest cannon would not penetrate more than two.... Seeing this, the Governor ordered his own nau to come alongside her. This was the Flor de la Mar, which had the highest castles of all.[^8] When she managed to board the junco, her aft castle barely reached her bridge.... The crew of the junco defended itself so well that they had to sail away from her again. [After two days and nights of fighting] the Governor decided to have the two rudders she carried outside torn away .... [The junco then surrendered.]

A second description of a jong, the most technically complete that I know of, was written in 1582 by Father Nicolau Perreira, S.J.:[^9]

>In the whole of Java the common ships are the juncos; some of them are very big, like the very large naus. They are not nailed together [with iron), but are [built] with wooden dowels inserted into the seams of the planks, so that they are not to be seen from the outside; for when the planks are assembled, they are perforated with an auger and these dowels are inserted, which remain inside the fastened planks. They have two masts in addition to the mizzen-mast… [The sails] are made of woven rattan... They have three rudders, one on each side and one in the middle... There is nothing made of iron aboard these juncos.

In addition to these two texts, a multiplicity of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Portuguese and Dutch sources — both textual and pictorial — provides very scattered information which, once assembled, allows us to bring out and list some basic features of the jong used in Southeast Asian waters at that time.

Firstly, their tonnage was considerable, at least by European standards of the time. There are sufficient indications in the texts to allow us to ascertain an average burthen of 400 to 500 metric tons. The smallest figure found was 85 tons, the highest 700. One jong, built in Japara around 1513 by Pati Unus and which took three years to complete, was certainly bigger and might have reached 1,000 tons: it was “the largest seen by men of these parts so far,”[^10] and carried one thousand people aboard. (As a basis of comparison, the medium-sized Bugis sailing ships so often seen in Indonesian waters these days have an average burthen of 50 to 100 tons; the largest are by now close to 200 tons or more.)[^11]

Secondly, these jong were built without the use of a single piece of iron.[^12] According to the description given above, the planks of the hull were edge-fastened by what is known about Southeast Asian shipbuilding techniques. Ships were built, and still are, following the shell-first, edge-to-edge fastening method, the frames being cut to fit and strengthen the shell once it was completed.[^13] Nothing is said in the available textual sources about the mode of fastening the frames to the shell in a sixteenth-century jong. Two methods — lashing with vegetal fibres or pinning with wooden dowels — are attested in Southeast Asian waters in various times and places.[^14] But the second, more elaborate method was most probably used: the Portuguese would not have failed to describe in detail such an exotic technique as lashed fastenings, as they have indeed done for smaller boats of eastern Indonesia, whereas pinning with wooden treenails instead of iron nails would not have been regarded as so strange. One has also to consider the fact that such a primitive technique as lashing might not have been sufficient to provide enough structural strength to ships of some hundred tons burthen.[^15] Present-day ships from Sulawesi or Madura still have their strakes pinned to rigid frames by way of dowels.[^16] This method could also be observed in Vietnam well into the twentieth century; the very scanty evidence on ship structures as yet available from recently discovered shipwrecks of the Gulf of Siam seem to point again to the use of the same technique.[^17]

The third feature is that multiple sheathing of the hull seems to have been characteristic of Southeast Asian (and Chinese) ships. The above-mentioned jong of Pati Unus had three superimposed layers of planks, all of which were more than a cruzado (2 cm) thick.[^18] The second wreck found at Johore Lama — presumably only a century old — also had two layers of planks.[^19] A thirteenth-century Chinese junk, homeward-bound from the South Seas, the remains of which were recently discovered in Ch’tian-chou, had up to three sheaths of planks.[^20]

The fourth important feature of the jong described in sixteenth- and seventeenthcentury sources is the fact that it used two quarter-rudders (as opposed to a single, axial stern-post rudder like those used at that time in the West or in China).[^21] This characteristic, strange to Western observers, is often referred to in their texts.[^22] Of the three coeval illustrations of a jong that I have been able to locate, only one represents this steering-gear in a plausible way (Fig. 2). The two others (Fig. 3) give a naive but unmistakable interpretation of what it should have been.[^23] Descriptions given by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century authors, and the simple observation of present-day practice in Indonesian waters,[^24] provide ample confirmation of the fact that this steering technique is and has been for a long time in common use in the area.

“The fifth feature to be noted is that the jong had multiple masts, usually from two to four, plus a bowsprit. In addition to the fore, main, and mizzen sails, a bowsprit sail (the cevadeira of Portuguese descriptions) was also rigged. The latter is clearly seen on the engraving attached to Lodewijcksz’s D’Eerste Boeck (Fig. 3). All the sails seem to have been made of vegetal matting. The textual sources themselves are not precise enough to allow us to determine the variety of sails used. The engraving in D’Eerste Boeck (Fig. 3), as well as the evidence drawn from later observations, leads us to surmise that the canted square sail was in common use aboard some of the jong,[^25] as it was recently on most sailing ships in Indonesian waters.[^26]

One last question should be considered — where these ships were built. In sixteenthcentury Portuguese sources, three main areas are mentioned: (1) the northern Javanese coasts, and particularly the regions around Rembang and Cirebon; (2) the southern coast of Borneo and adjacent islands; (3) Pegu, in the Gulf of Martaban, which probably was the main shipbuilding centre of the whole region.[^27] All three areas have been, or still are, renowned for their production of wood — particularly of teak. The shipbuilding centres were thus dispersed over a wide area, within which there were vast cultural differences. In all probability, some of the external features of the ships built in these various centres differed from one another. Pictorial evidence alone — if it had been richer — would have allowed us to get into this kind of detail. But the fact remains, as all the evidence examined above tends to prove, that these ships shared basic, structural features, As far as shipbuilding techniques are concerned, this is the essential point.

Before an attempt is made to go back in time and determine the features of earlier Southeast Asian ships, we thus have enough elements to establish a clear distinction between the jong and the Chinese “junk” for which it has so often been mistaken. Admittedly, the jong does share some features with Chinese ships: large carrying capacity, multiple sheathing of the hull, several masts and sails. But two characteristics enable us to distinguish it. The first is an essential constructional technique whereas the Southeast Asian shipwright made an exclusive use of wood to fasten the components of a ship with pegs, dowels, or tenons, his Chinese counterpart always used iron nails and clamps.[^28] The second major difference is in the steering gear. From the earliest times (first century A.D.), the axial stern-post rudder has been used in China, and this has been considered as one of the country’s great contributions to nautical technology.[^29] On the contrary, Southeast Asian ships commonly use double, lateral rudders. (This statement should exclude boats of the Vietnamese coasts; though they retained many purely Southeast Asian features, most of them adopted the axial rudder under heavy Chinese influence.)

For earlier times, the evidence being scarce, one has often to resort to informed speculation. As far as I can ascertain, local literary and epigraphical works are not of much avail for our purpose. Western and Middle Eastern travelogues or geographical works from the eleventh to the fourteenth centuries tell us little more than the fact that Indonesian powers owned and used large ships in their trade ventures in the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea.

One particular piece of evidence, which has drawn the comments of almost every historian of Asian shipping, is the set of beautiful reliefs carved on the galleries of Candi Borobudur at the beginning of the ninth century. They have been thoroughly investigated by Van Erp and Van der Heide though, I believe, their comments are to a large extent inadequate for lack of accompanying evidence.[^30] These reliefs fall into two main groups. The first represents ships fitted with outrigger devices. They seem to be medium-sized ships,[^31] and one can recognize on them several features of the Southeast Asian ships we found evidence for in the sixteenth century: multiple masts, in addition to a bowsprit, rigged with canted main sails and a bowsprit sail, and double quarter-rudders. The second group of reliefs, to which authors usually do not pay attention, is somewhat cruder in craftmanship: it represents obviously smaller ships, which are not fitted with outriggers.

I am convinced that none of these Borobudur reliefs should be considered to represent the large ocean-going ships of the Indonesian powers. The latter, as we will see from the evidence brought by contemporary Chinese sources, did not have outriggers. (The second group of reliefs confirms the fact that outriggers were not in general use at that time.) Then, as Van Erp pointed out, the first group ships were fitted with double outriggers (one on each side) and closely resemble the Moluccan kora-kora. It is well known that double outriggers can only be used in protected seas like those of the Indonesian archipelago; on the open ocean, they can be a considerable hindrance to navigation[^32] Thus, until further evidence is brought forward, one should not consider that the ships depicted on Candi Borobudur belong to the category of large ocean-going ships, the description of which is attempted in this article.

Evidence from the two main cultural areas that surround Southeast Asia is uneven. This is not only due to the different historical traditions of India and China. Modern scholarship has not been attracted by these problems in the Indian area, and there is no synthesis like that of J. Needham for Chinese nautical technology to which one can easily refer to. Indeed, many of the texts quoted by Mookerji’s unique but very inadequate study of Indian shipping do actually refer to large ships sailing to and from Southeast Asia.[^33] But these texts — the dating of which is unreliable — do not convey technical information. As far as the history of Indian ships is concerned, little is known of general structural features that would provide us with elements of comparison and allow us to seek affinities between the techniques of both regions. Southeast Asia is not an isolated area, far from it, and the technological borrowings which may have occurred from one side or the other might teach us a lot.

There is nevertheless one piece of Indian evidence which should not be overlooked. This is the very precise painting of a ship in the frescoes of cave n°2 at Ajanta, (According to the latest researches, these frescoes are contemporaneous with the excavation of the cave itself, that is, they belong to the first half of the sixth century A.D.)[^34] The Ajanta ship, from all the evidence, is a large one. It has no outriggers. Three high masts and a bowsprit, rigged with their respective sails, are clearly depicted. It is fitted with intricate steering-gear, unmistakably of the double quarter rudder type. All these features are shared with later Southeast Asian ships, Whether this is because the artist wanted to represent a foreign ship or the result of technical affinities between the two areas remains to be proved. But this fresco provides a precious confirmation of the feasibility of such a ship design at this early period.

The evidence brought forward by Chinese sources of the first millennium A.D. is far richer. We have already seen how a comparison with Chinese shipbuilding techniques had permitted us to specify in return some Southeast Asian features. These should be kept in mind as the following evidence is discussed.

From the third to the eighth centuries, Chinese sources provide us with descriptions of ships used by the South Seas people. One should remember that this is the period when a trans-Asiatic trade was being established, the main shippers of which were the maritime powers of Southeast Asia, and particularly Srivijaya.[^35] Their ships are conventionally referred to in these texts as the K'un-lun po 昆仑舶 (i.e., the po of the K'un-lun people). The meaning of the term K’un-lun has varied widely in the course of centuries. But during the period considered here, it indicates unequivocally Southeast Asian populations, among which was that of Srivijaya. Po is a term of foreign origin — according to the Chinese texts themselves — which the Chinese used to refer to the ships of the K’un-lun (no affinities with a Southeast Asian term have yet been discovered); it has remained in use for a long time in the Chinese language to signify a large ocean-going junk.

Here are two extracts from the above-mentioned texts. The first dates from the third century A.D.:

> The people of foreign parts call ships po. The large ones are more than fifty meters in length and stand out of the water four to five meters… They carry from six to seven hundred persons, with 10,000 bushels of cargo [according to various interpretations, from 250 to 1,000 tons].

>The people beyond the barriers, according to the sizes of their ships, sometimes rig [as many as] four sails, which they carry in row from bow to stern. From the leaves of [an unidentified] tree ... they weave the sails. The four sails do not face directly forwards, but are set obliquely and so arranged that they can all be fixed in the same direction, to receive the wind and to spill it. The pressure [of the wind] swells [the sails] from behind and is thrown from one to the other, so that they all profit from its force. If it is violent, they diminish or augment [the surface of the sails] according to conditions. This oblique [rig], which permits the sails to receive from one another the breath of the wind, obviates the anxiety attendant upon having high masts. Thus [these ships] sail without avoiding strong winds and dashing waves, by the aid of which they can make great speed.

This striking passage would not be disavowed by a modern nautical architect. A second text, from the eighth century, was written by a Chinese monk, in a commentary to the Buddhist Canon:

>The po are sea-going ships. They lie six or seven feet deep in the water. They are fast and can transport more than 1,000 men, apart from cargo. They are also called K’un-lun po. Many of those who form the crews and technicians of these ships are K'un-lun people.

> With the fibrous bark of the coconut tree, they make cords which bind the parts of the ship together.....[^36] Nails and clamps are not used, for fear that the heating of the iron would give rise to fires. [The ships] are constructed by assembling [several] thicknesses of side-planks, for the boards are thin and they fear they would break. Their length is over sixty meters.... Sails are hoisted to make use of the winds, and [these ships] cannot be propelled by the strength of men [alone].

Another text of the eighth century specifies again that: “The po are foreign ships.”””

In relation to these Chinese texts, it is worth mentioning that an expression of the third century, Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, that is, kolandio phonta, has been interpreted as a corrupt Greek form of K’un-lun po. It refers to the ships that sailed from India to Southeast Asia (Chrysé).°*

To sum up, the constructional features of these K’un-lun ships may be listed as follows

1. They were large ships (around fifty metres in length, with a carrying capacity of 500 to 1,000 people and a burthen of 250 to 1,000 tons).

2. No iron was ever used in fastening.

3. They had several layers of planks.

4. There is no indication in these texts of the steering-gear. But there are reasons to believe that quarter-rudders were in use on those ships. If, following the above evidence, they are considered as being of Southeast Asian build, then it is most unlikely that single axial rudders would have evolved to become double quarter-rudders. Furthermore, if my argument about Southeast Asian influences on Chinese shipbuilding techniques is further confirmed (see below), some features of ancient Chinese junks might well be interpreted as evidence of the former use of quarter-rudders. A twelfth-century Chinese author writes about rudders in this way: “[in addition to the stern-post rudder] abaft the deckhouse two oars are stuck down into the water from above, and these are called “Third-Assistant Rudders'.” Another expression used to refer to lateral lee-boards in the late Ming period was “waist rudders.”[^39] Such a terminology points indeed to the former existence of quarter-rudders, whether on some early Chinese sea-going ship or, rather, on the K’un-lun po from which the latter might have evolved.

5. These ships were rigged with multiple masts and sails.

6. They most probably had no outriggers, for such a conspicuous device would no doubt have struck the minds of Chinese authors, unfamiliar with this kind of exotic gear.

All of the above-mentioned features of the K’un-lun, that is, Southeast Asian ships, will be found in the sixteenth-century jong described above, whereas only some of them belong to Chinese junks. The obvious conclusion is that the jong, as it was known in the sixteenth century, evolved from the ships used during the first millennium A.D. by Southeast Asian maritime states, which is after all quite natural.

A second conclusion might be drawn from these premises, which will need further investigation. It is widely accepted by now that China did not possess ocean-going ships before the eighth or ninth centuries. The shippers of the trans-Asiatic trade route calling at Chinese harbours were aliens, many of them Southeast Asians. It is only after the Sung came to power that the Chinese started building a powerful ocean-faring navy, and by the thirteenth century the Yuan dynasty dominated the South China Sea and, to some extent, the Indian Ocean. This, in turn, is the period when Srivijaya, the strongest maritime power of Southeast Asia disintegrated and disappeared from the scene. There is every reason then to think that some time around the eighth or ninth centuries, shipwrights of Southern China, in regular contact with foreign ships, started evolving what was to become the large Chinese ocean-going “junk”. They would have made use of techniques which were peculiar to the Chinese world and which had proved their own worth for river or coastal navigation (i.e, separation of the hold by strong bulkheads into watertight compartments, axial stern-post rudders, etc.). But they would also have benefited from the high-seas nautical techniques of the K’un-lun people (i.e., rigging of multiple masts and sails, fastening of several sheaths of planks to the hull). A confirmation might be sought in the fact that in Chinese usage the word po, of K'un-lun origin, came to be applied to the great ocean-faring ships.

## Figures

Fig. 1 — Fastening of the strakes with dowels on a Bugis ship.

Fig. 2 — Jong (M. Godinho de Eredia, c. 1613).

Fig. 3 — Jong and other smaller craft (D’Eerste Boeck, 1598).

## Footnotes

This article is a slightly modified version of a paper submitted at the International Conference on Indian Ocean Studies held at Perth in August 1979. It is only the preliminary version of a more elaborate study, in which full evidence will be given. It is presented here as such, in the hope that it will provide a fruitful basis of discussion. I should like to thank Campbell Macknight for the many valuable suggestions hemade and for correcting my broken English,

[^1]: See, for instance, the two works by J.C. Van Leur, Indonesian Trade and Society (The Hague, 1967), pp. 128, 374 n.67, and M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz, Asian Trade and European Influence (The Hague, 1962), pp. 101-5, 353 n.114). A characteristic example of this assertion is given in the recent study by F.H. Van Naerssen: the author manages to use the word ship only once in his chapter on ‘The Maritime Powers of Sumatra”, and this unique reference is to Chinese shipping (The Economic and Administrative History of Early Indonesia, Handbuch der Orientalistik, 111/7, Leiden/Köln, 1977, pp. 28-36). Works like those of B. Schrieke, “De Javanen ls zee-en handelsvolk”, Tijd. Bataviaasch Genootschap 58 (1919): 424-28 and O.W. Wolters, Early Indonesian Commerce (Ithaca, 1967), esp. chap. 10, do more justice to local shipping, without getting into technicalities.

[^2]: The word jong is known from earlier Javanese texts, after the 12th century. See H. Kern's remarks on this word in his Verspreide Geschriften 12: 237-38 and 13: 147-48. Up-to-date comments on the Javanese texts quoted by Kern will be found in P.J. Zoetmulder, Kalangwan (The Hague, 1974).

[^3]: Possible links between ch'uan  or tsung Zand jong should be investigated. A good start would be provided by the few remarks on this subject by P. Pelliot, ‘Les grands voyages maritimes chinois au début du XVe sidcte”’, T’oung Pao 30 (1933) :446-47.

[^4]: These naus had a burthen of 300 to 400 metric tons. V. Magalhaes-Godinho, Os descobrimentos ea economia mundial, vol. 2 (Lisbon, 1963-65), pp. 78-81, gives higher figures (400 to 500 tons), but these refer to the naus used on the route from Lisbon to India. The average nau sailing east of India would have been smaller. The smallest had a burthen of 150 tons.

[^5]: For a recent analysis of Portuguese enterprise in Southeast Asian waters at the beginning of the 16th century, see L.F.F.R. Thomaz, “Les Portugais dans les mers de "Archipel au XVle sitele”', and G. Bouchon, “Les premiers voyages portugais & Pasai et à Pegou (1512-1520)”, both in Archipel 18 (1979): 105-25 and 127-57,

[^6]: Gaspar Correia, Lendas da India, vol.l, 1 (Lisbon, 1858), pp. 216-18. These events are confirmed, in less detail, by other 16th-century chroniclers as well as by Giovanni da Empoli, who was aboard one of the Portuguese ships; A. Bausani (ed), Lettera di Giovanni da Empoli (Rome, 1970), pp. 52-53, 130-31.

[^7]: In the various texts quoted in this article, italics have been used for the technical passages which form part of my evidence.

[^8]: The “Flor de la Mar” was a nau of 400 metric tons burthen. She was at that time considered a very powerful one.

[^9]: Description published in J. Wicki, ‘Lista de moedas, pesos e embarcaçoes do Oriente, composta por Nicolau Perreira S.J. por 1582", Studia 33 (1971): 147-48, Only extracts from this text are given he few parts still set some problems that cannot be discussed at length in this article.

[^10]: Information on tonnages will be found in the following sources. R.J. de Lima Felner, Subsidios ‘para a historia da India portuguesa, vol. 3 (Lisbon, 1868), p. 9. A.B. de Sa, Documentagao para a historia das missoes ... Insulindia, vol. 4 (Lisbon, 1954-58), p. 15. Diogo de Couto, Da Asia, dec. IX, chap. 27 (Real Officina edition, Lisbon 1786, XIX: 227). Documentacao ultramarina portuguesa, vol. | (Lisbon, 1960), p. 332. Ludovico de Varthema, Itinerario, (P. Giudici, ed.) (Milano, 1928), p. 257. Cartas de Affonso de Albuquerque, vol. 3 (Lisbon, 1884-1935), p. 59. Jorge de Lemos, Historia dos cercos gue os 'Achens e Jaos puserao a fortaleza de Malaca (Lisbon, 1585), 2nd part, Ist chapter. L.F.F.R. Thomar, “Maluco e Malaca”, in A viagem de Fernao de Magalhaes e a questao das Molucas (Lisbon, 1975), p. 41. V. Magalhaes-Godinho, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 176.

[^11]: Observations gathered during fieldwork in 1979 and from H.W. Dick, “Prahu shipping in Eastern Indonesia, Part 1”, Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies (1975): 71, and Usman Pelly, Ara, dengan Perahu Bugisnya (Ujung Pandang, 1975), pp. 16, 22, 29.

[^12]: confirmed by other texts, such as De Moluceis Insulis (dated 1523); a translation of given in Blair and Robertson (ed.), The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, vol. 1 (Cleveland, 1903-9), p. 305.

[^13]: On the classification of boats into broad categories like shell or skeleton build, see the standard works by B. Greenhill, Archaeology of the Boat (London, 1976), and L. Casson, Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World (Princeton, N.J., 1971).

[^14]: Two shipwrecks are known to have had edge-to-edge fastening of the planks and lashing of the shell to the ribs. The older was found in Pontian, near Pahang, and dates from some time during the first millennium A.D. (C.A. Gibson-Hill, “Further Notes on the Old Boat Found at Pontian, in Southern Pahang”, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society (JMBRAS), 25, no. 1 (195 111-33; regarding the date of this shipwreck, J. Boisselief noted that the pottery recovered closely resemble those found in Oe-co; see his report in Arts Asiatiques 20 (1969): 73. Another such shipwreck, presumably of Malay origin and dating from the 13th to 14th century A.D., was recently uncovered in Hong Kong (see the report in Journal of the Hong-kong Archaeological Society 5 (1974): 22-33. Around the middle of the 16th century, Portuguese authors describe this method being used in the building of the Moluccan kora-kora (G. Rebello, Informacao sobre as Molucas, published in A.B. de Sa, op. cit., vol. 3, pp. 317-22, 381-86; H.Th.Th.M. Jacobs (€d.), A Treatise on the Moliceas (Rome, 1971), pp. 156-59). A. Hofridge has recently found this technique being used in remote islands of Eastern Indonesia {The Design of Planked Boats of the Moluccas, National Maritime Museum, Maritime Monographs and Reports no.38, (London, 1978)1.

[^15]: A further improvement in the edge-to-edge fastening of the strakes is the addition of flat rectangular tenons inserted in mortises hollowed out in the seams of the planks and then secured by two wooden pegs which prevent the planks riding apart. Though this sophisticated technique would seem to differ from that described by Fr. Perreira (the wooden pegs would be seen from the outside), it also is well attested in Southeast Asia: it was used on Vietnamese boats and the planks of a presumably 19th-century shipwreck recovered in Johor Lama were fastened in this same way (P. Paris, “Esquisse d'une ethnographie navale des pays annamites"', Bulletin des Amis du Vieux Hub, 1942, p. 21; J.B. Piétri, Voitiers d'Indochine (Saigon, 1949), pp. 17-19 and Fig. 65: G. de G. Sieveking, P. Wheatley, and C.A. GibsonHill, “Recent Archaeological Discoveries in Malaya”, /MBRAS 27, no. 1 (1954): 229-30; C.A. GibsonHill, “Johore Lama and Other Ancient Sites”, JMBRAS 28, no.2 (1955): 178-79.

[^16]: Additional strength is provided by the driving of a wedge into the head of one out of three or four dowels (whether in the fastening of the planks together or that of the latter to the ribs), thus preventing the planks riding apart, This important technical detail, observed during recent fieldwork, had already been noticed by G.E.P. Collins, Makassar Sailing (London, 1937), p. 221. Recent descriptions of the building of Bugis ships are to be found in Usman Pelly, op. cit., and A.G. Hofridge, The Konjo Boatbuilders and the Bugis Prahus of South Sulawesi, Maritime Monographs and Reports no. 40 (London, 1979), See also C.C. Macknight and Mukhlis, “A Bugis Manuscript about Praus’, Archipel 18 (1979): 271-82.

[^17]: J.B, Piétri, op. cit., p. 17. Pensak C. Howitz, Ceramics from the Sea: Evidence from the Koh Kradad Shipwreck, Excavated in 1979 (Bangkok, 1979), p. 9.

[^18]: Cartas de Affonso de Albuquerque, vol. 3 (Lisbon, 1884-1935). p. 59.

[^19]: G. de G. Sieveking et al., op. cit., pp. 229-30.

[^20]: See the reports on this excavation in Wenwu (1975), no.10, pp. 1-35, and an abstract of this, in French, in C. and D. Lombard, “Un vaisseau du XI[le siecle retrouvé avec sa cargaison dans la rade de “Zaitun’, Archipel, 18 (1979): 57-67.

[^21]: In Fr. Perreira’s description given above, three rudders are mentioned (two lateral and one central). This differs from other 16th-century sources, as well as from later observations up to the 20th century. Fr, Perreira might have seen a ship with an oar — or rather a long sweep — fitted on the stern-post to help in harbour manoeuvres when the ship had hardly any way on her. This might also provide an explanation for the three steering-oars of the ships decorating the Gulf of Bengal and the South China Sea in the Lopo Homen-Reineis’ map of 1519 (A. Cortesao and A, Teixeira da Mota, Portugaliae Monumenta Cartographica, vol. I (Lisbon, 1960), p. 21.

[^22]: See, among others, L. de Varthema, op. cit., p. 257. L.F.F.R. Thomaz, De Malaca a Pegu, Viagems de um feitor português (1512-1515) (Lisbon, 1966), p. 134. Relagao das Plantas & Dezcripsoes de todas as Fortalezas ... (Lisbon, 1936), p. 45. J.V. Mills (ed.), “Eredia’s description of Malacca, Meridional India and Cathay"', JMBRAS 8, no.1 (1930): 36-37.

[^23]: One of these representations of a jong (Fig. 2), the best of the three, was drawn in Malacca by Manuel Godinho de Eredia some time before 1613 and he included it in his manuscript description of Asia (published for the first time by L. Janssen, Malaca, ('Inde méridionale et le Cathay (Bruxelles, 1881-82), 2 vols. with a facsimile of the whole manuscript, See also Mills’s translation and annotations, Op. cit). The second (Fig. 3) was engraved in D’Berste Boeck ... door G.M.A.W.L. i.e., Lodewijeksz} (Amsterdam, 1596), fol. 35-v*. The third one, by Jan Huygen Van Linschoten, was engraved in his Itinerario, Voyage ofte Schipvaert… (Amsterdam, 1596), pp. 32-33; this is a rather freakish rendering of a ship, probably including Chinese elements into it (it is reproduced again, in a slightly modified form, on the right-hand side of the above-mentioned engraving by Lodewijeksz; see Fig. 3).

[^24]: One could refer, for instance, to the descriptions and the beautiful and technically very accurate drawings and plans made by Adm. E. Paris in Southeast Asian waters during the first half of the 19th century (Essai sur la construction navale des peuples extra-européens (Paris, 1841), 2 vols. He gives a good description of the steering-gear of an Achehnese boat (pp. 70-72, and plate 76). Other descriptions will be found in C. Nooteboom, “Vaartuigen van Mandar””, Tijd. Bataviaasch Genootschap 80, no.1 (1940): 29 and in Hogridge, op. cit. (1979), p. 21.

[^25]: Information on the number of masts and sails will be found in the sources quoted in notes 10 and 22. The richest source for that purpose is a document published by L.F.F.R. Thomaz, which gives the details of the sails purchased in Pegu to be rigged on a newly bought jong (op. cit., 1966, 134ff.).

[^26]: One may refer to the above-mentioned drawings by Adm. B. Paris. The Bugis ships, though they have been rigged with Western-style sails for the past century, used to have canted sails (see B.F. Matthes, Ethnographischen Atlas … opheldering van het Boegineesch Woordenboek (The Hague, 1874), pp. 16 and 17.

[^27]: A, Cortesao (ed.), The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires (London, 1944), pp. 183, 189, 195, 226; see also the sources quoted in notes 10 and 22 above.

[^28]: On the common use of iron nails and clamps in Chinese shipbuilding, from at least the 8th century onwards, see J. Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 4, no.3 (Cambridge, 1971), pp. 412, 459. Some clamps were recovered in the above-mentioned (n.20) 13th-century Chinese wreck.

[^29]: Needham, op. cit., pp. 627-56.

[^30]:' Th. Van Brp, Voorstellingen van de vaartuigen op de reliefs van den Boroboedoer, Monographiten over Kunst en Cultuur, no.t (The Hague: 1923), (also in Nederlandsch Indië Oud en Nieuw (1923): 227-55. G.J. Van der Heide, ““De samenstelling van Hindoe-vaartuigen, uitgewerkt naar beeldwerkken van den Boroboedoer”’, Nederlandsch Indië Oud en Nieuw 13 (1928): 343-57. The work by Van Erp is illustrated with excellent photographs of these reliefs.

[^31]: The crew of these outrigger boats is obviously not represented to scale and cannot be of any help in ascertaining their size. But one detail at least allows us to give a rough estimate of it: this is the relative dimensions of the oars — or rather the paddles — which stick out of the portholes on some boats (Van Erp, op. cit., plates 7 and 10).

[^32]: On the use of double outriggers, see J. Hornell, Water Transport: Origins and Early Evolution (Cambridge, 1946), pp. 253-71, and the discussion of this chapter by P. Paris, “Discussion et données ‘complémentaires 2 propos de Ï'ouvrage de M. James Hornell ...”", Mededelingen van het Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde, no. 3 (Leiden, 1948), pp. 39-40.

[^33]: R. Mookerji, Indian Shipping (Bombay, 1912).

[^34]: The best colour reproduction of this frescoe is to be found in G. Yazdani and L. Bynion, Ajanta: Colour and Monochrome Reproductions of the Ajanta Frescoes ..., vol. 2 (Oxford, 1930-55), pl. 42. Needham, op. cit., Fig. 967, gives a freely interpreted tracing from this painting. See also D. Schlingloff, “Kalyanakarin's Adventures. The Identification of an Ajanta Painting”, Artibus Asiae 38, no.1 (1976), pp: 5-28. For the dating of these caves and their frescoes, see P. Sterf, Colonnes indiennes d'Ajanta et @'Eilora (Paris, 1972), pp. 139-41.

[^35]: O.W. Wolters' Early Indonesian Commerce (Ithaca, N.Y., 1967), is the standard work on this matter. G. Ferrand, in “L'empire soumatranais Çe Crivijaya”, (Journal Asiatique (1922): 1-104, 161-216) and “Le K'ouen-louen et les anciennes navigations interocéaniques dans les Mers du Sud” Wournal Asiatigue, 13 (1919): 239-333, 431-92; 14 (1919): 5-68, 201-42} published and commented all the textual evidence available at that time.

[^36]: This seems to be a reference to the lashing of some components of these ships (see note 14 above). But dowelling must also have been used, for it appears impossible to sew or to lash together multiple sheaths of planks.

[^38]: A. Christie, “An Obscure Passage from the Periplus”', Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 29, no.2 (1957): 345-63. But R. Stein had already proposed this same reading of the Periplus in “Le Lin-yi”, Han-hiue, vol. 2 (1947), pp. 65-67. Other interpretations of kolandio phonta through Sanskrit or Tamil have also been propounded [G. Coedés, Textes grecs et latins relatifs d VExtr@me-Orient (Paris, 1910), p. xvii, n.1); P. Meile, “Les Yavana dans I'Inde tamoule”, Journal Asiatique (1940), pp. 90-92.

[^39]: Needham, op. cit pp. 619, 642.
