## NOTES MADE BY MAJOR-ADJUTANT DE STUERS DURING THE JOURNEY OF THE CHIEF MUTINEER PRINCE DIPANAGARA FROM MAGELANG TO BATAVIA.(28 March-9 April 1830.)

(Anteekenangen gehouden door den Majoor Ajudant De Stuers bij het overbrengen van den gearresteerden hoofdmuiteling Prins Diepo Negoro van Magelang naar Batavia.)

* When the original Dutch Mss has been quoted, the original spelling has been kept otherwise both Javanese and Dutch names have been changed to modern usage.

from: de Klerck E.S. De Java Oorlog, Vol V,Bijlage XXXVI pp 741-6 Gravenhage 1908.

At about nine o'clock in the morning (2sth March) having departed from Magelang (1) with an escort of Hussars, the silence was broken every now and then by Dipanagara at Bedono, with the exclamation: "How have I come to this! How did I come to this!" Otherwise he showed no fear or concern for his future lot.

At Bedono he changed from the carriage to a Joli and till Jambu we heard nothing more from him, he had a slight fever.

At Jambu a carriage was ready with which we proceeded further to Ungarang, with an escort of hussars who followed us at a distance.

At Ungarang we took a short rest, and Dipanagara asked permission to go and pray, whereupon he went onto the walls of the little fort and he was observed by us from a distance. Afterwards he ate with the Commandant and ourselves at table, and appeared to have a very good understanding of European customs. I had until then never seen a Prince from the Yogyakarta court sit and eat so decently at table.

After he had sat at table for about an hour, he asked permission to rest. He spoke affectedly about Mertanagara (2) but did not mention any of his own children. He asked me to write to General de Kock in Magelang so that His Excellency might be pleased to inform his people so that they would not be sad about his absence, to say that God had thus ordered it, that his people should as far as possible remain united, that General de Kock should be certain to keep a good eye on them and look after them well, furthermore that various women, followers, and baggage should be sent to him.

Furthermore he conversed for some time longer with Captain Roeps about various points concerning earlier negotiations, and showed that he had been under the impression that if this time he could not come to an agreement with General de Kock, that people should have let him return without hindrance to the mountains (3)

At about seven o'clock in the morning we left for Semarang accompanied by the necessary cavalry escort, there a room in the Residency House had been assigned to Dipanagara, whilst the necessary military and other safeguard for his custody were immediately undertaken by the Resident and the Commander of the military district without these being in any way humiliating for him.

Dipanagara requested to be allowed to take his place this time at the Resident's table, which was accorded him, he was extremely civil, and retired shortly afterwards to pray and rest.

Although the following day he showed not the slightest fear about his future, he nevertheless showed by the following questions whereon he wished our opinions, that he was concerned about it.

He asked namely what should be best for him, either to live lonely and isolated in Sambirata, (4) or at the expense of the Government to live in Batavia, or rather to go and live in Mecca, (5) for which he reckoned one million guilders would be needed. Shortly afterwards followed the question whether Ambon was a large island. (6)

Learning from us that the chief priest who had followed him from the start of the troubles and had replaced Kjahi Maja in all his positions, (7) had shown himself just as little inclined as Haji Badarudin (8) to follow Dipanagara, Dipanagara's displeasure about that disappointment burst out in bitter reproaches against the priestly class (9) as a whole, (10) and he cried out; " Those are the men who should have been the first to have adhered loyally to me, whose advice together with that of the ulamas I always took and followed, for what do I know about the Holy Books except for what they taught and told me about them and they are thus the people whom I have always relied on, those are they who now desert me!" When we answered Dipanagara that both the above priests would follow later so that they could know what would be decided about him, he asked; " Well now! They want to know first what will become of me and if it should be better with me than they have it with them, then they will come to me first!"

On another occasion he said; " I always had very little to do with the negotiations which took place. For the negotiations at Sambirata (11) I placed all my faith in Kjahi Maja, who filled the highest positions with me, he only gave me reports about what happened and I was contented with that. Kjahi Maja later lost my trust because he always promised and predicted things which I did not see performed, then he commenced on his own authority a negotiation at Melangi of which I never had any knowledge, but when these had also gone badly, and I had often reproached him with the fact that the area of Pajang where he had lived for a very long time was peaceful, he then decided to go there immediate with a strength of 5-600 Bulkios, and on his request I sent him over the river Praga with almost 500 guilders which he had asked me for. At the negotiations at Melangi Kjahi Maja had only a few priests from Pajang with him (12)

When he was questioned what sensation the fall of Kjahi Maja had made on him, he replied with indifference, that he had at first not wished to listen to the fugitives Haji Mustafa and Tumenggung Mangkuyuda, who had come to relate the events to him, and adding that he had then said this was Kjahi Maja's own fault. Dipanagara went on to explain to us further that he had often had very little knowledge of what had happened, that it was quite by chance that he had come to hear of Sentot's advantage over the 8th Column, (15) because on hearing the great shouting of the people and after asking them what it was about, they gave the answer that people were moving back captured artillery and weapons.

On that occasion confirmed what Captain Roeps had often heard told formerly by various Javanese, that namely when Kjahi Maja was lowered in rank and regard, matters had less cohesion and unity amongst the mutineers, as that priest, who passed for being very learned in knowing the Koran completely by heart had succeeded by exact practise of the rules laid down in it, he had been able to establish his influence and authority among the people to such an extent that even priests who had often been to Mecca, had shown themselves inferior in everything to Kjahi Maja, even though Kjai Maja himself had never been to Mecca.

During a later conversation Dipanagara said this; "Why should I have waged war against the Europeans if I did not have sufficient reasons? The Patih (14) and the Secretary (15) were always in conflict together; if I as a guardian proposed something and the Patih did not agree to it, then he was always able to arrange things as he wanted. (With indifference), the renting of land, (16) the payments with the Sultan's money, as I never bothered myself with that, I had no say, ask anyone (with vivacity) why I left, everyone knows very well in Yogyakarta, (He answered a question) "To whom should I have unburdened myself to in Yogya? When I said that I wished to betake myself to the Government, the Resident told me that he represented the Government."

"My estate at Tegalreja," he continued of his own accord, "is rectangular," tracing it with his finger and some water on the table, " in which the graves of my ancestors are located. Not long before I went away, people wanted to build a road straight through my estate, although both to right and left of the estate there was a road which was sufficient. Without my being consulted about it, markers were set to trace out this new road, when I was informed of this, I had the markers torn out, but on other days others were again placed, which I once again had removed."

"I was then summoned to the Residency House by Mangkubumi, but I had refused to go, for shortly beforehand the rumour had gone around that I would be exiled. I was once again summoned by Mangkubumi, who would have himself been arrested and imprisoned if he did not bring me back, and I refused again and went outside whilst people came to tell me that my 'Dalem' was surrounded on all sides by troops."

"I deny that I had for a long time previously gathered together people to me with hostile intentions, because my flight occurred in such a hasty manner and so unexpectedly that I had to leave behind 3000 guilders in ready money, much padi, and various other things. I went to Selarong, I gave no one any orders, what then happened was ordered by the chiefs, who were able to follow in succession.

How could people send Mangkubumi to arrest me? He could never take any steps against me, as I am of course of better birth than he!",

Another time he said; "I used to go now and then to Bedaya; (17) Smissaert is a good person but weak. Whenever I went there, Mrs Smissaert out of the goodness of her heart used to come after me offering a bottle of sweet wine which she knew I liked at that time."

When talking about the people in the Vorstenlanden and about the way he controlled them, he said; "The people from Madiun are good in resisting a first attack, and they acquit themselves well, but afterwards they are not much good. The people from Pajang are also brave, but also for a short of time. The people from Bagelén are better, but they must be able to fight in their own area, if they are used outside it, they collapse quickly. But the people from Mataram are the best of all, they fight well, they persevere, and they know how to withstand the hardships of war."

To each question which people later posed the Pangéran and which had a connection with the causes of the rebellion, he always replied reluctantly to begin with, his first reply was then, "Oh! (Giving the impression of some impatience) why do you ask me about that? Get your information from Yogya, there people know everything. Then falling silent for a while, he continued in a spirited way, "As a guardian (18) I always had nothing to do, we were always informed about the money which was put into the Sultan's treasury, because I had to give my seal for that, but we never had any knowledge of the money that was paid out of the treasury, and only that which was destined for payments within the Kraton was given to Wiranagara. (19) When I was away outside, I heard that there was no longer any money in the treasury, although everyone thought that there must still be much left. The Patih (with much disdain) needed money, first with this first with that excuse, things were always being built. That Dietrée (20) (with disdain) was always busy with the Secretary and the Patih, anything of some importance was dealt with outside of us. I was friendly with Nahuys, but I was on especially good terms with Resident de Salis, (21) with him affairs went well, but as soon as the others came (he meant Mr Smissaert) (22) everything was plunged into disorder."

Continuing of his own accord, and speaking about his late brother, the, Sultan, he carried on; "When he died, he swelled up in a horrible manner," (23) "Then he was certainly poisoned," said Captain Roeps, where-upon Dipanagara without the least emotion and continuing in the same tone of voice said; "He received rice and Javanese food from the Patih, and just an hour later he was already dead. My brother did nothing of importance in which he did not take my advice, I was older than he, whenever we ate together I had always to eat first and afterwards my brother took my left overs. I said to him now and then; 'When I am with you in the Residency House, do not speak to me, because I might sometimes answer you in Low Javanese, which could perhaps be noticed and taken amiss.'" On another occasion (he said); "I was recently angry with my son Dipakusuma, not because he had deserted me, but because he had submitted to a Javanese, Wiranagara (with the greatest disdain). If he had submitted to Colonel Cochius or to another, I would not have reproached my son."

When we informed Dipanagara on the 3rd of April that we would continue to Batavia, he expressed immediate readiness, he only requested that when we had arrived there, that long negotiations would not be held again with him;" People know that I long to either to have my legal rights (The Dutch term used in the Mss is Stafrecht.) or to be sent to Mecca or to another place. By 'legal rights' he meant that he had the authority to appoint one priest at Yogya and one at Solo, who would exercise the law according to the Koran and not according to our laws. (24)

On another occasion he recounted how during the period of the British administration, it was left up to his choice whether he wished to be raised to the Sultanate, but that he did not wish to take upon himself that status, for too many worldly pre-occupations were attached to it, that the people in general loved him more than his brother, and that this attachment had formerly somewhat estranged him from his father. (25)

"If I," he said on another occasion during which he spoke very confidentially, "If I had continued to insist on the known demands, then it was out of the conviction that people at the courts did not follow the old adat so scrupulously as before, above all that people neglected religion. In earlier times, long before the arrival of Europeans in Java, we had also a Sultan named Agung ( 'the Great’ ), who was a spiritual man and did as I did, traveling around everywhere. The title of Sultan I accepted at the time on the advice of a very old man whom I came across, between the Praga and Bagawanta rivers, and who assured me that otherwise I would have no salvation or prosperity." (26)

"I always had a deep desire to have a really fine Mosque, I had spent much money on the one I had in Tegalreja; that was very nearly completed when I had to leave." Then continuing with indifference, "If I had had the intention to wage war, I would surely have kept my money better. A Mosque had always been a delight for me, one does not always have to pray in it, but it directs the heart to religious sincerity. In imitation of what the priests do, I often went to Pasar Gédhé, (In the Mss, ' Passer Gedee ' which obviously refers to Kota Gédhé.) to Imagiri (In the Mss, ' Wonogierie ( Djaratan )', which would seem more plausibly ' Imagiri) ( Jimatan ), and to the south coast ( Guwa Langsé) (In the Mss, ' ( Goewoh Lahgie ) ', which is obviously Guwa Langsé.) and also to Selarong. I usually went on foot and without a following to Pasar Gédhé and Imagiri, but to the two other places I always took a large mounted escort with me. To the last mentioned places, I went often to help cut and plant padi which popularised the chiefs with the people. (27) My wanderings did not go beyond this. My eldest son had from his youth shown much attachment to the priestly class; he usually went to those places where he had heard there were famous priests or learned men. Once when he had remained away for an unusually long time, I became concerned about it and went to look for him with a couple of men on foot.

"I learnt that he had gone to the learned men in Maja, where in fact found him amongst the pupils of this Guru and was on that occasion able to make the acquaintance of Kjahi Maja, who later came to visit me of his own accord when I had been for a while in Selarong. (28) I went by Kejambon, Puluwatu, and various other country roads from Yogya to Maja. This happened during the period of Colonel Nahuys (29) after that time I did not visit that place again.

Dipanagara gradually got into a good mood and was pleased with the considerate treatment which he received in the Residency House. We used this opportunity to hear his opinion on other matters and to question him further.

Noted below are the basic contents of these conversations.

"Many things happened without my consent of which I scarcely had any knowledge. The guardians and other people were killed by common people. I knew about it only afterwards when sometime later I saw the bodies of those that had been killed lying at Lengkong. (30) How could I have possibly given orders to kill these people at Lengkong, when they were mostly members of my own family."

"I left Tegalreja with a couple of boys, (and) people came to tell me that my Dalem had been surrounded; 1000 men of my own people at Tegalreja followed me swiftly, and when shortly afterwards Yogya was plundered and burnt, then more and more people gathered together with me and then first I also got some weapons, because you know full well that in the beginning the people were mostly armed with staves and slings. When I was at Selarong, I knew not at all how events would turn out. I was amazed to see everything come to that pass, I gave no orders, Kjahi Maja ordered everything. The commanders were first appointed by me long after that on the suggestion of Kjahi Maja.

"How is it possible that my answer to General de Kock from Selarong was not satisfactory? (31) I had already determined myself where I would meet him behind the Kraton at Krapiak. Could my answer not have been transmitted properly?" That Dipanagara asked again later. He seems to be under the impression that his answer was satisfactory. But when I then mentioned to him on two later occasions he had entered on negotiations with General de Kock, and that if he had had such peaceable feelings, he had had the opportunity to satisfy them, and that the General had shown no more passionate desire than to make an end to the unfortunate circumstances in which Java had fallen and that he had enabled Dipanagara to further these feelings if he was so disposed, he said; "I had nothing to do with the first negotiations of Kjahi Maja at Sambirata," 'Just stay,' said Kjahi Maja, 'and I will settle everything," And at the last negotiations (at which Captain Roeps was present) (32) you know full well that the commanders did not wish to allow that you (Captain Roeps) should come to me, I asked them again what they thought about it, and whether they wished to continue fighting, where upon they answered unanimously that they were willing. Does not General de Kock also do the same with his own troops?"

"Earlier I had quite a lot of land, some in Kedu but more recently some to the South of Yogyakarta, in Bagelén and Banyumas and in the Sukawati area, together comprising some 700 jonks. (33) A section of my people I frequently freed from taxes. I was wounded twice at Gowok, (34) and earlier by a bayonet thrust, when I was helping to defend the rights of my father against the English. The bullet that hit me on the chest at Gowok bounced back. It was as though something within me told me to spare the Europeans, because we could not be in Java without them. I had gathered more than 25-30000 men with me at Gowok and could have undertaken much, because my men's fighting morale was very high, since the Europeans went in search of a cemetery which for us is a good presage. At Selo and Kecubon (35) stood on a piece of high ground to laugh a little at the enemy cavalry who had sunk into a swamp, when I found myself unexpectedly attacked from behind by another squadron of Hussars, and I escaped the danger with difficulty. In August 1829 I was mostly with Sentot when we had to run so much. It costs us great difficulty to cross the Praga after the fight at Cermé. (36) We had to march the whole night with torches along an extremely difficult path. I knew that General de Kock was at Sentolo, but I also thought that he was present at the fight at Tangkilan, (37) therefore I dared not show myself. I could have kept up wandering from one désa to another for much longer. I always seperated myself from my small band of soldiers, Bantengwareng and Rata were the only ones with me." (38)

I had nothing in common with Sultan Sepuh since his return to Java. (39) He did indeed write to me a couple of times from Yogya, but then affairs had already gone too far. At the Solo court I only know Mangkunagara and Purbaya, who had been once or twice to Yogya. Purbaya also once wrote to me during this war, I do not know anyone else in Solo besides them.

On the morning of the 5th when we went down to the steamship. Dipanagara was in good heart but silent, perceiving many people on the wharf who had gathered together there out of curiosity, Dipanagara covered his face with an end of his turban, which excited the curiosity of the multitude even more, but caused at the same time a great disappointment.

Our embarkation went to plan, when we left land he looked around on all sides, but I saw no emotion in him. On board everything suited him very well, "Here I am," he said, "entirely at my ease, so I could quite remain thus, I am quite content provided people treat me in a polite and friendly manner, ( looking at us ), but my present situation is the consequence of the surly and contemptuous treatment which I had to experience before."

During the 12-13 days which we spent with Dipanagara, he was always in a constant and good mood, and extremely resigned or rather indifferent to the decisions about his future fate. But, he clearly showed on certain occasions that he was concerned about it nevertheless, when shortly before his departure people came to inform him that his favourite concubine was being sick, had asked to be allowed to stay behind, when he gave the reply; "This also happened once to Sultan Sepuh, when he was about to be exiled to Ambon." (40)

Dipanagara appeared to have confidence in us, he was extremely genteel in his social relations, he was neither difficult nor exacting and seemed to avoid everything which he thought could draw any attention to our watchfulness and vigilance, by which Dipanagara showed that he could be what he was not at Metesih. (41)

If a tray in Dipanagara struck Captain Roeps and myself in particular, then it was his unchanging indifference or resignedness or submission ( I do not know quite how to describe this feeling as it manifested itself in Dipanagara ), concerning the dispositions which would be pronounced concerning his future life, and which he had requested that he might speedily hear.

BATAVIA, the 9th April (Signed) DE STUERS.
Major Adjutant.

END NOTES:

1. Pangéran Dipanagara was taken prisoner by General de Kock after the failure of the peace negotiations at the Residency House in Magelang on the 28th March 1830. Captain J. Roeps, the interpreter and de Kock's personal adjutant, Major-adjutent de Stuers were instructed to escort Dipanagara from Magelang to Batavia, a part of the way by sea from Semarang. This report of de Stuers is the outcome of frequent conversations with Dipanagara during this journey, but although the report is signed by de Stuers it seems more likely that Captain Roeps had the most contact with Dipanagara for he alone spoke good Javanese and was already on good terms with the Pangéran.
2. Ali Basah Mertanegara was Dipanagara's son-in-law and one of the two young army commanders who remained with Dipanagara till the end and was also at the conference at Magelang, (the other was Ali Basah Gandakusuma - his brother), He was apparently a Lieutenant from the Palace guard in Yogyakarta and had joined Dipanagara shortly after he fled to Selarong in July 1825. (see de Kock Coll. No. 159/78. ARA The Hague) and a son of Patih Danureja II (1799-1811 ingkang sèda kedaton) he became Bupati Wedana Keparak Gedongkiwa and commandant of the Prajurit Kraton after the war.
3. This refers to the promise made to Dipanagara at the initial peace negotiations at Rema Kamal (Banyumas) on the 16th February by Col. J.B. Cleerens the Dutch officer in charge of the negotiations. Cleerens promised Dipanagara thet he would be permitted to return to his mountain headquarters in Bagelén should the negotiations with General de Kock at Magelang prove unsatisfactory for him. This guarantee was ignored by Gen. de Kock when he trearnermgeky took Dipanagara prisoner, but Dipanagara was later to remind Cleerens of it in a letter from Macassar. ( Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 d, Canto 40 v 174-140, and Dipanagara's letter to Maj-Gen Cleerens, 15 December 1835, in Geheim Besluit March 1837, Arsip Negara, Jakarta.)
4. Dipanagara's headquarters to the West of the river Praga, just to the north of Wates, during the last years of the war (1827-9).
5. Dipanagara was contemplating a pilgrimage to Mecca after his capture. (see Journal of Knoerle p.12, also mentioned in Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 d, Canto 43 v 234-9, and in a letter from the Res.of Menado to the Governor-General, 22 April 1831, Arsip Negara, Jakarta.) ( and for his intention to settle in Mecca, Journal of Knoerle, p.33)
6. Kjahi Maja and his following of 62 santris had been exiled to Ambon after his capture in Klaten on the 28th November 1828, Dipanagara's interest in Ambon was aroused by the hopes that he would meet Kjahi Maja again. ( see Journal of Knoerle pp 22-3 ).
7. There is some doubt as to who exactly this was but it may have been Haji Imanraji from Ngapaingan (a désa 2 miles to the East of Yogya) who was given preference over Kjahi Maja when the latter refused to accept the position of Pengulu in October 1828 just before Kjahi Maja opened negotiations with the Dutch at Melangi. ( Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 c, Canto 33 v. 118-9. )
8. A follower of Kjahi Maja who had twice made the pilgrimage to Mecca ( Journal of Knoerle p. 21 ) and who later became the chief Pengulu of Bagelèn after the Java War (see de Klerck E.S. De Java Oorlog Vol VI p 198 ff ). From the desa's Ngawen just to ws Yogya 1 km to ng Mlangi.
9. No entry.
10. An Islamic scholar learned in Fikh law, and in Arabia known as ‘alim, In Java it had a more general meaning for older santris as distinct from lay folk. (Snouck Hugronje C. De Atjehers, I, 74, nt 3 and Juynoboll Dt Th. Handleiding tot der kennis van de Mohammedaansche Wet, p. 25 ).
11. These negotiations took place ix at the end of October 1828?
12. These negotiations took place on the 31st October 1828 and Kjahi Maja was accompanied by two of his pupils Kjahi Dadapan and Kjahi Melangi, their failure was largely due to Kjahi Maja's own ambitions for territorial aggrandizement. (Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 c, Canto 34 v. 92-0.)
13. This refers to Ali Basah Sentot's victory over Major Buschkens' 8th Mobile Column and Tumenggung Sindunegara, the Bupati of Tegal, at the désa of Kroja in W. Bagelén on the 1st October 1828. The Dutch troops and their Tegalese allies were almost totally destroyed and Major Buschkens three cannon captured. (Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 c, Canto 34 v 63-68).
14. Radèn Adipati Danureja IV (1615-1887)
15. P.F.H. Chevallier, Secretary of the Yogya Residency (1823-5) see Notes 24 end 25 of Knoerle's Journal.
16. Dipanagara is probably refering to the negotiations for the ending of the European leases of land in the Vorstenlanden after the 16th May 1823 Law promulgated by Governor-General Van der Capellen which prohibited land leases. European leasees were paid out of a lump sum of money from the Yogya Kraton treasury for improvements they had made on the lands they held. The situation caused severe difficulties for the finances of the Yogya Kraton and for those Yogya aristocrats who had leased land, and bitter arguments occurred about indemnities, in one of which Dipanagara in fact played a leading role although he denies it here fer( the land in question was that held by the Resident himself at Bedaya on the flanks of Mt. Merapi.)
17. The Resident of Yogya's country estate on the flanks of Mt Merapi (5 miles to the North of Pakem ) which was originally leased by Col. Nahuys from Sultan Hamengku-buwana IV in 1818.
18. Pangéran Dipanagara was appointed a guardian of the child Sultan Hamengkubuwana V (1822-1855) after his coronation on the 16th December 1822 on the initiative of Resident de Salis. The other guardians were Pangéran Mangkubumi, Patih Danureja IV, and the Yogya Resident.
19. Tumenggung Major Wiranagara, the commandant of the prajurit Kraton before the Java War and an opponent of P. Dipanagara, He was in fact married to Dipanagara's eldest sister, previously R.A. Mangkuwijaya. ( see Journal of Knoerle p.26 ).
20. J.G. Dietrée, the Dutch interpreter at the Yogyakarta Residency (1796-1826), see Journal of Knoerle p.15 and note 41. )
21. Baron A.M.Th de Salis, temporary Resident of Yogyakarta 1-11-1822-- 10-2-1823,
22. A.H. Smissaert, the Resident of Yogyakarta, 10-2-1823 - 26-9-1825 (dismissed), see Journal of Knoerle, p.4 and note 10.
23. Dipanagara is referring to the death of his younger brother, Sultan Hamengku~buwana IV (séda besiyar) on the 6th December 1822. Talks of poisoning were rife at the Yogyakarta court at the time and this passage from the Babad Dipanagara, Kedhung-Kebho version, KITLV Or Mss 13, helps to support Dipanagara's description; Canto III:

v.36 | Translation
--|--  
Nulya dhahar Sri Naréndra | Then the Sultan dined  
matur aris | he said softly
Sang Nata marang kang ibu | to his mother:
dhuh ibu kados napa | Oh mother what is the matter,
lesu lupé awak mami | I have lost my hunger!
dennya matur pan sarwi anggayuh ulam. | he exclaimed whilst reaching for meat.

v.37 | Translation
--|--
Ulam taksih wonten lésan | The meat was still on his tongue
anjungkel Sri Narapati | (when) the Sultan toppled over
wedana nungkeni ajang | his head falling into his plate
tan émut lajeng ngemasi | he did not regain consciousness (and) then died.

The main difference with the Babad version is that the Sultan's food was provided by Pangéran Mangkubumi, ( v.35 saosan saking njaba, saking Pangran Mangkubumi, pan punika dhaharan saking kang rama, )

24. This was the essence of what Pangéran Dipanagara was striving for at the conference with General de Kock at Magelang and which had been refused him, (see Journal of Knoerle p.18 and note 51.)
25. However Dipanagara's right to the Yogyakarta Sultanate was apparently recognised by the British Government in a letter of contract given to Dipanagara in 1812, (Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 b, Canto 16 v 95-7, Canto 17 v 39-46 and it is also mentioned in a letter of Dipanagara to the Ratu Ageng dated September 1823, Yogyakarta Kraton Mss A.62 pp 78-9.)
26. P.Dipanagara was in fact a raised as Sultan on the advice of Kjahi Maja at Selarong on the 10 Sapar Tahun Wawu 1753 (Friday Wagé) and the Yogyakarta Kraton Babad gives the chronogram Triwisik swaraning ratu, 24th September 1825.( Yogyakarta Kraton Mss A.62 p. 168. )
27. This rather echoes Raffles own description: " Those of the highest rank and greatest authority, generally attend at the opening of the new sawah fields, performing part of the work with their own hands, and leading their inferiors or dependents, as they express it, to pay respect to the earth...." ( Raffles T.S, History of Java, London 1817, p.247 ).
28. Dipanagara here contradicts what he states in Knoerle's account ( see Journal of Knoerle p. 23 ) about his first meeting with Kjahi Maja. The Babad Dipanagara gives a long account of Dipanagara's meeting with Kjahi Maja at Selarong ( Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 b, Canto 22 v 78-84 ).
29. Colonel Nahuys van Burgst was Resident of Yogya from 1816 -1822.
30. This refers to the death of guardians of Sultan Hamengkubuwana V at the désa of Lengkong (Sléman area) on the 31st July 1826. Besides the two guardians, P.A. Panular and P.A. Moordaningrat, who were killed, Dipanagara's uncles P. Adiwijaya, P.Natabaya, and P. Suryawijaya also met their deaths ( see Journal of Knoerle pp 20-1 and note 57 ).
31. This refers to P. Dipanagara and P. Mangkubumi's joint letter to General de Kock from Selarong on the 23rd August 1825 ( Louw +.J.F. De Java Oorlog, Vol I, pp 727-9 ) however no mention is made of a meeting place for negotiations.
32. These were the negotiations conducted between Capt Roeps and Sentot on the 26-29 January 1829.
33. Dipanagara's new grants of land to the South of Yogyakarta in Gesikan and Bantul are mentioned in the Babad Bedhah ing Ngayogya, L/Or 2045 pp
34. On October 15th 1826, it was Dipanagara's final attempt to attack Surakarta and ended in failure.
35. P.Dipanagara was, taken by surprise at the désa of Selo on the 1829 the event is fully described in Dipanagara's Babad and his near capture a by Dutch Hussars also mentioned, ( see Babad Dipanagara, L/Or 6547 d, Canto 36, 60-60 ) apparently Dipanagara's grooms could not see the colour of the Hussars' uniforms and had told Dipanagara that they were Désa people moving to the next village. ( the event is also described in de Klerck op.ci Vol V, pp 306-9 ).
36. Dipanagara is refering to the victory of the Dutch at Mt Cerma in the Kelir Mt District in the early part of August w 1829 which destroyed his base in the Kelir Mts and forced him to flee back across the Praga river with Sentot.( i.e. to the East).
37. Another Dutch victory over Dipanagara's retreating troops which forced Dipanagara back across the river Praga to the east.
38. This refers to Dipanagara's later wanderings in Bagelèn with his two panakawan Banteng-wareng and Rata, these wanderings lasted for nearly two months ( November-January 1830) and took Dipanagara as far away as Rema on the borders of 1829) Banyumas in the extreme West of the old Bagelen area. ( see Journal of Knoerle notes 8 and 38 ).
39. Dipanagara is refering to Sultan Hamengkubuwana II's (Sepuh) reinstatement to the Yogyakarta Sultanate on 17 Sept. 1626 until his death on the 2 Jan. 1828. The move was instigated by the Dutch to win Dipanagara and those members of Sultan Sepuh's family who had followed him back, but as such it failed ( Louw P.J.RF. op. cit. Vol II, Bijlage 28 pp 431-3 for Pangéran Mangkubumi's reply to Sultan Sepuh's entreaties. )
40. In 1816 after Java had been returned to the Dutch, Sultan Sepuh was returned from Pulau Penang where he had been exiled to by Raffles in 1812, to Batavia, from there he was sent by the Dutch authorities to Ambon and various Raden Ayus from the Yogyakarta court were allowed to join him in exile but his favorite Ratu Kentjana Wulan refused to go, (see Yogyakarta letters, September 3, 1816, no. 41, Arsip Negara, Jakarta).
41. De Stuers is referring to Dipanagara's (from the Dutch point of view) stubborn behavior when he was at Magelang encamped with his troops and followers on the island of Metesih, an island in the Praga river just below the Magelang Residency House. Dipanagara's stubborness mainly resolved itself around his refusal to negotiate during the fasting month (Puasa).
