# The Wédhatama: An English Translation
by Stuart Robson  
Working Papers 4, 1990

Koninklijk Instituut Voor Taal Land En Volkenkunde

The Working Papers series of the Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Landen Volkenkunde includes publications which, whether as collections of source material, studies of one aspect of a wider problem, or general discussions, are intended to stimulate debate and further research, and as such are of a provisional nature.

<!-- TOC START min:2 max:6 link:true update:true -->
  - [Preface](#preface)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
    - [The Wédhatama in Javanese literature](#the-wdhatama-in-javanese-literature)
    - [The text](#the-text)
    - [The translation](#the-translation)
    - [The teaching](#the-teaching)
  - [Text](#text)
    - [I Pangkur/Canto I](#i-pangkurcanto-i)
    - [II Sinom/Canto II](#ii-sinomcanto-ii)
    - [III Pucung/Canto III](#iii-pucungcanto-iii)
    - [IV. Gambuh/Canto IV](#iv-gambuhcanto-iv)
  - [Comments](#comments)
  - [Bibliography](#bibliography)

<!-- TOC END -->

## Preface

The aim of this small book is twofold. Firstly, it hopes to make a famous product of Javanese literature and thought better known among those who do not read Javanese, Indonesian or Dutch, so that a wider public may have the opportunity to get an impression of what classical Javanese poetry can be like. And secondly it aims to make a contribution to the process of interpreting the content of the Wédhatama by means of a translation that is as accurate as possible, within the limited resources of this translator. Seeing that several predecessors have already smoothed the way, it should not be too difficult to produce a reasonably good, and comprehensible, translation. In both aspects of this work I am attempting to fulfil one of the tasks of the philologist, namely making texts accessible, this time primarily by interpreting and explaining.

Any measure of success is to some extent due to the efforts and influence of those around one. When I chose to read the Wédhatama with a group of students a few years ago, I knew that it would be tough going, but the way was made easier by the presence of Ben Arps, who contributed good suggestions and whose help I here acknowledge. In particular I wish to mention the fact that Professor G.W.J. Drewes was kind enough to read and comment upon a draft translation; his comments and corrections were of great value to me, and in many cases I have shamelessly adopted them, although where the wording still falls short I alone am to blame. It was Professor Drewes's guidance that helped me over the threshold to revise the translation and to provide it with notes and an introduction, so that it could be made available to others. Finally, I should mention that my interest in the Wédhatama was stimulated by the dissertation written by Dr Moh. Ardani (1988) on the thinking of Mangkunagara IV as contained in his didactic works and seen from an Islamic viewpoint.

May it be more than a mere pious hope that others will also feel called to continue the study of Javanese literature, a field where many and various treasures await discovery. More specifically, I would like to invite readers to respond to the translation by putting forward suggestions for further improvements and better interpretations of this important text.

## Introduction

### The Wédhatama in Javanese literature

Javanese scholars of literature, if asked to mention the names of some of the highest products of their literature, may well begin with the Wédhatama. It is indeed held in high esteem, even today, although this does not necessarily imply that many have actually read it, or would be able to give an account of its contents.

The prestige enjoyed by the Wédhatama flows from several sources. Firstly, there is the fact that it is attributed to a princely author, Mangkunagara IV of Surakarta (lived 1811-81, ruled 1853-81). This already lends it a certain authority among cultured Javanese, who look to the courts of Surakarta and Yogyakarta as the centre of civilization, one of the expressions of which is found in traditional Javanese literature. Secondly, there is the reputation of the Wédhatama as representing an ideal of literary beauty, to be sought in the use of noble language appropriate to its subject, expression echoing with elegant vocabulary and laden with alliteration and assonance. And thirdly, the Wédhatama is heavy with the authority of teaching on sublime subjects such as philosophy and mysticism, all set out within the compass of only 72 stanzas.

For those approaching this work without the benefit of a knowledge of Javanese literature, a few notes may be welcome for general orientation. With the Wédhatama we find ourselves approaching the end of the traditional or classical period of Modern Javanese literature; the language is often called Kawi by the Javanese, referring merely to its archaic, literary nature. It is not correct to refer to the language as Old Javanese, as this is the language of the kakawin and parwa which, as it happens, is also called Kawi by Balinese scholars. It was Balinese scholars who preserved Old and Middle Javanese literature over the centuries more or less intact, as part of their inheritance from Hindu Java. With the coming of Islam to Java in the 16th century Modern Javanese began, on the one hand continuing elements from preceding times and on the other incorporating new themes from outside. This literary tradition was further developed at the courts of Central Java, in particular in the second half of the 18th century, when peace returned after a long period of conflict and disruption. Following the Java War, the colonial period began in earnest in 1830, but literature continued to be produced in both Surakarta and Yogyakarta, and went through a late flowering up to the 1880s, only to fade with the spread of Western education among the upper classes. By the early 20th century traditional Javanese literature, though by no means forgotten, had begun to lose momentum and to make way for modern forms under the influence of steadily advancing changes in society.

The date of the Wédhatama is not known with any certainty, but it can be placed in the late 1870s, toward the end of Mangkunagara IV's reign. It is the work of a mature writer and thinker.

The Wédhatama is a didactic poem, as can be seen even in the second line (I.1b) in the words mardi siwi, 'to instruct my sons'. This kind of work is termed piwulang. We cannot tell whether one particular son is meant (his successor, Mangkunagara V?), or perhaps sons in general. In any case, as part of the rhetoric of this genre, a son is repeatedly addressed (kaki; kulup, 'my boy', 'young man') in the course of the poem. The teaching is not intended for all young people, however; the wong anom (plural) of 1.14g are the descendants of Sénapati, that large group including all the nobility of Central Java: members of the Kasunanan house of Surakarta, its junior partner the Mangkunagaran, the Sultanate of Yogyakarta and its offshoot the Pakualaman.

Didactic poetry has a respectable ancestry in Javanese, reaching back to c. 1465, when Mpu Tanakung wrote his Sutasasana, 'Instruction for Sons' (Robson 1979:304), and continuing through the Nitisastra, Niti Sruti and Niti Praja on to the more recent Wulang Rèh, Wulang Sunu, Wulang Estri and other poems of Pakubuwana IV (reigned 1788-1820), not to mention the Sanasunu of Yasadipura II (written in 1819).

Mangkunagara IV was a prolific writer, producing works in the field of history, fiction, lyric, wangsalan (riddles) and literary theory (ilmu sastra), as well as a number of didactic works (Pigeaud 1927). In Part Three of his collected works (ed. Pigeaud 1928), the following didactic works (serat piwulang) are listed, and it is noteworthy that the majority are dated: Wara Yagnya (1856), Wira Wiyata (1860), Sri Yatna (1861), Nayaka Wara (1862), Candra Rina (1863), Pali Atma (1870), Salokatama (1870), Darma Wasita (1878), Ngèlmu, Pitutur, Puji, Wédhatama.

For some reason, the following titles were not included, although present in manuscript in the Mangkunagaran Library, Reksa Pustaka (Florida n.d.): Tripama (no date), Laksita Raja (1867), Darma Laksita (1878). In view of its fame among later generations, it is odd that the Wédhatama bears no date and is represented by only one manuscript in the Mangkunagaran Library, compared with several for the other didactic works of Mangkunagara IV. Nevertheless, it is definitely attributed to him.

However, this attribution has been questioned. When the Java Institute announced a competition for a Dutch translation of the Wédhatama in 1935 (Djawa 15:161), it was said explicitly 'according to the opinion of many educated people in Surakarta wrongly attributed to K.G.P.A.A. Mangkunagara IV, but in fact composed by R.M.Ng. Wiryakusuma'. When we recall that this competition was sponsored by Mangkunagara VII, it is all the more striking. The doubts were repeated by R. Tanojo in 1963 in the introduction (Pambuka) to his Weddha Tama djinarwa, with the additional information that Wiryakusuma was a mantri langenpraja in the Mangkunagaran, that is, an official responsible for the arts. Tanojo even goes so far as to say that others claim that the Wédhatama was written on the orders of Susuhunan Pakubuwana IX by his court poet R.Ng. Ranggawarsita. Further we should mention that in a manuscript of the Wédhatama kept in Leiden (Cod.Or. 6486) we can read (in Dutch) 'Copy of a manuscript belonging to Mr D.A. Rinkes', with a note added in pencil 'the original made by Mangkunagara IV in Surakarta'; another hand, in fainter pencil, has crossed out the name Mangkunagara and altered it to 'Rn M.N. Wiryokusuma'. Hence perhaps too much weight was attached to this by Pigeaud, when he wrote: 'The critic ascribed the poem to radèn mas ngabèhi Wirya Kusuma' (Pigeaud 1968:383). After all, who was the 'critic', and on what authority did he make this change? The manuscript belongs to the Hazeu Collection acquired by Leiden University Library in 1931, but there is no indication as to when or where it was copied from the original in the possession of Rinkes.

Finally, it is interesting to note that this R.Ng. Wiryakusuma really did exist, and was active as an author, as is seen from the fact that he wrote a Serat Gambiranom in Surakarta in 1882; the manuscript of this is kept in the Mangkunagaran Library under MS no. 447. Another work by Radèn Mas Ngabèhi Wiryakusuma was actually printed. This is the Serat Tambang Prana. On the title-page he is described as a 'prayantun ingkang amarsudi kasusastran Jawi, saha santana dalem ing Mangkunagaran, Surakarta' (a gentleman who practises Javanese literature, and a relative of the Mangkunagaran House). The copy consulted was even a second printing, dated 1905. Here the author is referred to as suwargi, that is, deceased. The text, which is 39 pages in length, is didactic, containing teaching for young people on how to serve their King and related subjects. In the third stanza of the first canto the poem contains the dating pitung candra ngèsthi siwi (1817), which is equivalent to A.D. 1887. In several places the expression is reminiscent of the Wédhatama, for example in I.8 ngrebda ardané dadi saardi, compare WT III.4 ngrebda saardi gengira. To what extent this is coincidental, or even deliberate imitation, is unclear. Further study may yet turn up evidence relevant to the question of authorship. Sartono Kartodirdjo, Sudewa and Suhardjo Hatmosuprobo were already struck by a close resemblance in style between the Tambang Prana and various of the 'Serat-serat' (Collected works) of Mangkunagara IV, and made a comparison between certain passages from both (Sartono et al. 1987-88:69-77). It is not, however, true (as they assert) that Drewes claimed that Javanese scholars had attributed the works of Mangkunagara IV to Wiryakusuma. Drewes was referring only to the Wédhatama, which 'is according to many Surakarta men of letters in fact the work of R.M.N. Wiryakusuma, whose authorship passed into oblivion in a matter of decades because of the fame of Mankunagara IV' (Drewes 1969:9).

It is noteworthy that in exactly the same period as Mangkunagara IV was writing his many works, other authors were also active in Surakarta, and in this connection we think first of all of the famous court poet of Sunan Pakubuwana IX (who reigned 1861-93), R.Ng. Ranggawarsita, whose production was even greater, in terms of volume. To what extent there was collaboration or influence among these various authors is as yet unclear. In fact, the literary history of the second half of the 19th century remains to be written.

### The text

The text of the Wédhatama that is presented and translated here is the one published in Part Three of the Volledige werken (Complete works) of K.G.P.A.A. Mangkunagara IV under the guidance of Th. Pigeaud in 1928. This publication was brought out by the Java Institute on the occasion of the commemoration of the 120th anniversary of the birth of Mangkunagara IV, on the instructions of Mangkunagara VII. According to Javanese reckoning, on 7 August 1927 it was 120 years since his birth in A.J. 1738 or A.D. 1811 (Pigeaud 1927:238-9). Part Three contains the moralistic (didactic) poems, the letters in verse and the Salokantara. This text was chosen as basis for the translation because of its status as 'official' or accepted text, as well as being the best known and most widely available.

However, it is also true that other printed versions exist. The oldest are:
1. Serat Wédatama anggitan dalem suwargi Panjenengan Dalem Kangjeng Gusti Pangéran Adipati Arya Mangkunagara ingkang kaping sekawan. Vogel van der Heide en Co., 1885, Surakarta (Javanese script, 16 pp.). [N.B. 1885 on title-page, but 1891 on cover - is this a later printing?]
2. Serat Dwidja Isjwara, anggitan dalem suwargi kangjeng gusti Pangéran Adipati Arya Mangkunagara IV, kawedalaken déning Ki Padmasusastra, tiyang mardika ingkang amarsudi kasusastran Jawi ing Surakarta. Albert Rusche & Co., Surakarta, 1899. [N.B. Collected works published by Ki Padmasusastra; Wédhatama on pp. 107-22.]

These two editions were available in the library of the Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde in Leiden. M.F. Hatch, who discusses the various editions in some detail, indicates that there have been several more printed in Indonesia (Hatch 1980:227, but see also 505-6). The only one of these available was R. Tanojo's Weddha Tama Djinarwa (on cover Wedatama Djinarwa), Surakarta: Trijasa, 1963. This contains two texts, the first transliterated from a Yogyakarta original, and the second containing a paraphrase following each stanza. It is strange that Hatch does not mention the Terjemahan Wedhatama published by the Yayasan Mangadeg, Surakarta, in 1975. This again contains two texts, the first taken from a manuscript (no number given) in the Mangkunagaran Library, and the second taken from manuscript Br. 651 of the Museum Pusat, Jakarta. Both are translated into Indonesian, and provided with explanatory word-lists.

The text translated is in the form of Javanese poetry called macapat. It is organized into cantos in different metres, as follows:

No.  |Name of Metre   |No. of stanzas   |Scheme  
--|---|---|--
I| Pangkur| 14| 8a, 111, 8u, 7a, 12u, 8a, 8ì
II| Sinom| 18| 8a, 81, Sa, 81, 71, 8u, 7a, 81, 12a
III| Pucung| 15| 4u, 8u<sup>1</sup>, 6a, 8i, 12a
IV| Gambuh| 25| 7u, 10u, 121, 8u, 80

Total number of stanzas: 72

<sup>1<sup> The textbooks give this line as 12u, but here the fourth syllable always contains u, and so this has been treated as a separate line: 4u, then followed by 8u.

The lines (gatra) within each stanza (pada) have been set out under each other, rather than continuously, in the belief that this makes it easier to see the structure, as well as to compare the translation with the original. It will be observed that each line has a fixed number of syllables, and also a fixed final vowel, as indicated in the schemes above; for example, 8a means a line of eight syllables ending in the vowel a.

It should be pointed out, however, that the text described above is not the only version of the Wédhatama. Firstly, there is one which is slightly shorter; this was prescribed to be used for the Dutch translation sponsored by the Java Institute in 1936, and lacks stanzas II.7-9 and IV.3-6. The omission of these stanzas, which was not supported with arguments, is discussed by Hatch (1980:284-9), who draws the conclusion that they did not belong to the most original text, on the evidence of the fact that they are also not present in the 1885 printing, but were added soon after. While this is indeed possible, there is no firm proof: the opposite may also have happened; that is, they were present in the original but for some reason were edited out for the first printing. We shall refer to this question again shortly.

Secondly, there is another version, this time longer, consisting of 100 stanzas instead of 72: in other words, the original 72 stanzas have had 28 more added. This version is found in Tanojo's little book (1963), where it is said to originate from a Yogyakarta manuscript; it is found in the Terjemahan (1975), where it comes from a Mangkunagaran manuscript; and lastly in the Volledige werken (1928) the addition is also presented but indicated merely as a 'continuation' (sambetan), rather than an integral part of the text. It was thus not present in the two oldest printed versions, and is almost certainly a later accrescence; stylistically it seems uninspired and the content represents a mere expansion. For these reasons it is not adopted here. The addition consists of an extra 10 stanzas of Gambuh and 18 stanzas of Kinanthi. These have been translated into Indonesian recently by Darusuprapta (1985).

Further, a detailed comparison of the various texts shows a variation in wording which, albeit unimportant for the essence, is still interesting from a philological viewpoint, as it demonstrates how variation can be introduced into an authoritative text even within a period of just over 100 years and even when printing is involved alongside handwritten materials. In other words, although the text was fixed in a printed form not long after its creation, it has continued to be subject to minor alteration by subsequent editors. To take one example to illustrate this point, compare the following readings from the opening words of the text:

I.1  |Print edition   |Text  
--|---|--
  |Vogel van der Heide   |  Mingkar-mungkur...
  |Dwidja Isjwara   |  Mingkar-mungkur...
  |Volledige werken   |  Mingkar-mingkur...
  |Yayasan Mangadeg (a)   |  Mingkar-mingkur...
  |Yayasan Mangadeg (b)   |  Mingkar-mingkar... (misprint for mingkur, as appears from the word-list).

If, at least theoretically, it were possible to eliminate or disregard typographical errors, for which Indonesian books are notorious - and even Hatch is not exempt (Eg. S 12 tuguk for tutug; S 13 kudani for dukani; mistha for nistha; S 14 oampahan for lampahan.) - then we could treat this minor verbal variation as a case of 'white noise', to use the term introduced by I. Proudfoot (1984:92-3) and developed into a useful concept by T.E. Behrend. Behrend writes:

>As applied to literary texts, white noise refers to the small scale variability of syntactic and semantic elements that appear incidental to the activity of textual transmission or recensional composition [...]. The movement of [such] change seems to have been devoid of system, and without an overall organization aimed at achieving specific stylistic or other identifiable literary ends. Instead, white noise variation arises directly out of the perception of the exemplar as a somewhat plastic entity that allows a good deal of small lexical and grammatical variation without the basic "text" being affected.' (Behrend 1987:278-9.)

The above views form the basis for not attempting a reconstruction of 'the most original' text, but for adhering to one specific set of variants as contained in a particular recension. In this case it is the one printed on the authority of Mangkunagara VII in 1928, which has been reproduced exactly, although in transliteration.

While connoisseurs of Javanese culture will argue that Javanese script is more appropriate, more in keeping with the spirit of the work (and I agree), nevertheless a transliteration was considered more likely to reach an audience of students who are not necessarily specialists. The matter of transliteration immediately raises the question of spelling. Here it was decided also to be as 'normal' as possible, and to use the usual modern spelling current in Java (using th and dh instead of the better t and d ), but distinguishing é and è (hence leaving e [pepet] unmarked). Consonants which are doubled in the Javanese script, as in suffixation, for example, are not doubled in the transliteration, and here we part company with Hatch, who does not make a convincing case for keeping it (Hatch 1980:293). There is no difference in spelling conventions with regard to homonyms, e.g. kikisan, 'by the kikis, a measure of rice', and kikisan, 'boundary'. As for ing, it should be realized that we are dealing with three unrelated morphemes, namely:

a. -ing/-ning, which is a suffix indicating possession;
b. ing, a preposition meaning 'in, at, on'; and
c. ing-, a prefix indicating the passive with verbal bases commencing with a vowel (Hatch 1980:294).

The normal principle is to write affixes attached, but words separately, and a test of the status of affix is indeed doubling of final or initial consonant of the base in the Javanese script.

The main merit of Hatch's study is of course that he concentrates on the performance of a macapat text, and the Wédhatama is the text of which he chooses to analyse this performance and its techniques, as illustrated by Nyai Béi Mardusari: Chapter 6 is devoted to her rendition. This is available in the form of a cassette recording issued by Lokananta (ACD 082). Those who concern themselves exclusively with the scribal aspect of texts have a tendency to forget that Javanese poetry has another dimension, namely the musical, and that ideally it should be realized by a singer and perceived by ear. This does not detract from the fact that it is more than mere pleasant sound, and that it was certainly the author's intention to convey a message by means of words with identifiable meanings; but these words are ordered in a special way, in which the musical layer should not be ignored.

Seeing that the Wédhatama has been appreciated for its use of language, it may be useful to point out some of the effects to be found in it. In particular, attention can be drawn to purwakanthi swara (assonance) and purwakanthi sastra (alliteration). (The term rijm (rhyme) used by Ras (1982:323) is not appropriate for these devices. See also Hadiwidjana 1967:64-5.) These are admired for their poetical effect. Some examples of assonance and alliteration are:

I.6e gumarenggeng anggereng anggung gumrunggung, to describe the booming of the wind around an empty cave; and

1.13e tarlèn saking liyep layaping aluyut, to describe the dim world we perceive between the states of sleeping and waking.

Purwakanthi basa is the repetition of a syllable or word from one line to the next, as occurs in 1.12, thus:

> Sapantuk wahyuning Allah  
Gya dumilah mangulah ngèlmu bangkit  
Bangkit mikat rèh mangukut  
Kukutaning jiwangga  
Yèn mangkono kena sinebut wong sepuh  
Liring sepuh sepi hawa  
Awas roroning atunggil

Baliswara is a device employed to satisfy the requirements of the metre regarding final vowel, by which words can be placed in reversed order, in contravention of normal syntactic rules. Several examples are found in the Wédhatama, and these will be pointed out in the notes.

A prominent feature of classical Javanese poetry is the use of rare or archaic vocabulary. The more redolent of ancient times, echoing with the wisdom of the sages of the past, the more fitting to convey a profound or esoteric message. For example, in the Wédhatama we find no passive using the everyday passive prefix di-, but instead the archaic infix -in- or the prefix dèn-. Sometimes the desire to create an archaic effect takes on a rather exaggerated form, such as Ngèksiganda for Mataram, derived via mata, 'eye', and arum, 'fragrant'.

### The translation

In 1935 the Java Institute announced a prize for making a Dutch translation of the Wédhatama (Djawa 15:161): f 200 for the first prize, f 100 for the second and f 50 for the third. The judges were to be Professor G.W.J. Drewes, R.M.A.A. Koesoemo Oetoyo and R.Ng.Dr Poerbotjaroko, and the closing date 1 January 1936. The text to be used was that published in the Volledige werken by the Java Institute in 1928 (vol. III:108-40).

The result, however, was unsatisfactory, as reported by the judges in Djawa 16 (1936), pp. 217-8: only seven entries had been received, and in such bad Dutch, or failing to understand the text at all, that no prize was given.

So the competition was repeated in December 1936, and by August 1938 twenty-six translations had been received. On the committee Poerbotjaroko was now replaced by M. Koesrin, and Drewes was replaced by Professor C.C. Berg, who had taken his place in Batavia.

The results were announced in Djawa 21 (1941), pp. 65-9. No. 22, under the pseudonym of Resi tjipta ning, was highly praised by the judges as a 'superieure praestatie, die ver boven het werk der andere inzenders staat, en in sommige gedeelten bepaald bewondering afdwingt. De commissie was eenstemmig in haar oordeel [...]' (a superior achievement which stands far above the work of the other entrants, and in some parts definitely commands respect. The committee was unanimous in its judgement [...]) (Djawa 21(1941):68).

The translation turned out to be by Dr P. Zoetmulder, a Dutch Jesuit living in Yogyakarta. His translation, with the text supplied by the committee, was published in Djawa 21 of the same year, pp. 182-98.

Zoetmulder's translation is indeed admirable, and provides a sound basis for a new interpretation in English. The fact that it was into Dutch, however, means that it is now relatively inaccessible, combined with its being in a journal no longer generally available.  This translation is listed by MF. Hatch, who was the first to attempt a version in English. In fact, Hatch has made two English translations, the first in collaboration with the Solo scholar Suranto Atmosaputro, published in the Cornell journal Indonesia in 1972. This translation was followed by the one offered in the context of Hatch's Cornell dissertation of 1980. In some ways the first was better than the second, which suffers from oddities of English expression, as well as what must be regarded as mistakes. While it is true that a wide margin for individual insights into the meaning of words must be allowed, especially in the case of a text deliberately filled with 'difficult', classical vocabulary, it is perhaps also evidence of too great a zeal to discover hidden nuances in a text supposed to be 'deep' or 'mystical'. Does this derive from contacts with Indonesian scholars?

This is of course a delicate point - after all, some would maintain that it is 'their' literature! But what should we do when someone presents an interpretation which cannot be supported by an appeal to either the existing dictionaries or to the logic of the context? If such an interpretation is apparently isepan jempol (fantasy), then I for one would have no hesitation in saying so.

The Indonesian translations of 1975 (Terjemahan) are not traceable to individuals but are probably the work of a panitia (panel). In general they give a good impression of the content of the text, but have a tendency to smooth over difficulties and at the same time to water down the meaning. Was this deliberate, or is it an inevitable effect of rendering Javanese into Indonesian? The poetical feeling is gone, only dull prose remains.

Against this background the present translation may be seen as an attempt to face the challenge of making something better, of avoiding some of the pitfalls, be they of a technical nature or in the more subjective matter of style, both of which are equally important. Personally, I have the impression that there may still be places where someone more talented than I will have the task of improving on the translation and interpretation some time in the future.

### The teaching

Regarding content, there is a development in the poem corresponding to its formal articulation extending over the four cantos, I Pangkur, II Sinom, III Pucung and IV Gambuh.

A key concept is introduced at the outset. This is ngèlmu, meaning originally 'knowledge, science', but often with the extra nuances of valuable, esoteric knowledge, knowledge useful for the spirit, hence philosophy or philosophy of life.

Having been introduced, this concept is immediately qualified: kang tumrap nèng tanah Jawa - here we are interested in ngèlmu as it applies to the land of Java. This suggests a particular perspective, perhaps an awareness on the part of the author of a Javanese identity, as distinct from others which may have obtruded themselves on his time and world.

Canto I argues the necessity of possessing this ngèlmu; he who does not have it is dubbed the Fool. His lack of understanding can be seen in his outward conduct, especially his failure to grasp his own shortcomings.

Genuine ngèlmu cannot be substituted with ngèlmu Karang, 'magic arts'; these are superficial and worthless. The young man to whom the teaching is addressed is exhorted to take instruction from a suitable guide; furthermore, the teaching should be relevant to one's own position (trap ing angganira). Kingship (kaprabon) should serve as a guiding principle, evidence that the instruction is intended for the ruling class. The search for insight will be rewarded by inspiration from God.

Canto II introduces an example, in fact the most excellent example, of a man who followed the recommended path. And at this point another key concept is put forward. This is laku, a 'rule of life, discipline, ascetic practice'. Once again it is specified that this has to be applicable to the Javanese: tumrap ing wong tanah Jawi.

The example is Panembahan Sénapati, described as the 'Great Man' of Mataram. It was Sénapati who can be said to have founded the Mataram Dynasty. He lived in the second half of the 16th century, first under the Sultan of Pajang (died c. 1587) and later independent, as related in the Babad Tanah Jawi. Mataram itself is the district around the present Yogyakarta, and Sénapati made his headquarters at Kota Gedé. The importance of Sénapati here is that he was the one who gathered the spiritual power needed to establish his authority as ruler. This he did by means of rigorous ascetic exercises, consisting of avoiding human company and resisting the need for food and sleep. As a result, even Ratu Kidul (Queen of the Southern Ocean) had to admit that her power had been excelled by Sénapati (sor prabhawa lan wong agung Ngèksiganda). Sénapati's sovereignty over both men and the invisible realm of the spirits, led by Ratu Kidul, is ratified in the agreement that his power will be available to his descendants, providing they also discipline themselves. This favour has been passed down, so that his successors have also been mighty men and have ruled over Java as kings (II.6-7).

Having clearly pointed out the way that should be followed, the author also shows the way that should not: some take as an example the Prophet, and make this an excuse for showing off, even though they comprehend little of the elements of Islam. The young are warned off this course, in the well-known lines Rèhné ta sira Jawi / sathithik baé wus cukup, 'Seeing that you are Javanese, just a little will be enough' (II.10). Being Javanese makes a difference: there is no need to go to excessive lengths in your observance of Islam.

It is better to be practical and consider how you are going to earn a living - the particular calling is unimportant. The author cites his own personal experience of religious fervour: it turned out to be impracticable. Seeing that he had been born as son of a high official (suta priyayi), it was preferable to fulfil the duties of such, because to strive to be a Muslim official would be to lower one's position (II.13).

This leads on to the 'three principles of life', status, property and skills, without which one is worthless. The perfect man masters his will in solitude, but at the same time he occupies himself with the tasks attaching to his position; but unfortunately this is not the case with many young people.

Canto III combines the concepts of ngèlmu and laku, in the famous words ngèlmu iku / kalakoné kanthi laku, 'Knowledge goes together with practice'. This means that the mere acquisition of knowledge is not enough, if it is not put into action by means of discipline. This in turn means overcoming selfish desires and cultivating peace of mind. Alongside a positive example, again a negative one is cited, namely the arrogant Sayids of Egypt eager to show how superior they are to others. Even clearer, those who find it necessary to go to Mecca in search of wisdom are denying their identity as Javanese (III.7). A curious internal reference at this point (III.9e) sends the reader back to what has been revealed in the Sinom canto on achieving one's proper standing in life, presumably II.13-14.

Here the author returns to ngèlmu; we may reach agreement on what it is by means of discussion, but it can only be put into practice by means of asceticism (tapa). Again, the Javanese nobleman (satriya tanah Jawi) is referred to explicitly; he surrenders himself humbly to the Lord, and this is pleasing to Him, not like the selfish, conceited man, who fails to achieve his object.

Canto IV is entirely devoted to an exposition of the four kinds of worship. These are arranged in ascending order: that pertaining to the body, thought, soul and essence. Worship with the body is in fact the usual ritual prayer of Muslims; it is preceded by an oblution using water, and is performed five times daily. But this is only the way of an apprentice, a mere beginner.

Four stanzas (3-6) warn against mixing matters of Islamic law with inner discipline, quoting how the santri Dul or santri brai on the Pacitan coast had been misled into strange deviations in the name of religion.

Following the rules of Islam can also be regarded as a discipline, which has a benefit in that it refreshes the body which in turn brings about peace of mind. But because people are of many kinds there are also a variety of ways to follow.

The second kind is worship with the heart: 'it is a great discipline, belonging to a king' (IV.11). At this stage there is no longer an outward washing using water, but an inward purification consisting of reducing the desires of the heart, leading to calmness and mindfulness.

The third kind, worship with the soul, involves a process of absorption into the universe, or identification of the microcosmos with the macrocosmos, so that the individual consciousness fades away and the worshipper is confronted with his real self. This is not all, as a flame or star remains, representing 'what contains and is contained' (IV.22).

Finally, the worship of the essence is so esoteric that nothing can be said about it, only that it comes through inner firmness.

The closing admonition is not to claim to understand unless it is clear. But if it is so, then 'put your trust in Providence', iku dèn-awas dèn-émut / dèn-memet yèn arsa momot, 'Keep it in view, remember it. Do your utmost if you desire to possess it'.

Considering the above teachings, there are several questions that arise in one's mind. Firstly, what is the author's real attitude toward Islam? It is tempting to think that he is anti-Islamic, in view of the explicit criticism presented, and this is not altogether impossible. However, it is more likely that he is neutral toward Islam as such, but reserved or critical toward certain manifestations of it. Combatting excesses is less important than offering a better alternative. For the Javanese, and by this in fact he means the Javanese nobleman, a better example to follow is that of Sénapati, rather than the Prophet. The author is aware of the technicalities of Islam and the difficulties involved in following the Prophet's example, but they do not interest him too much - after all, he knows no Arabic. Is it really a matter of not being able to imitate the Prophet, or of having something more relevant to turn to? The conviction comes over clearly that the Javanese tradition of spirituality is more relevant to the Javanese ruling class. The consequence is that the salat may be useful for some, but need not be performed by those who are more advanced on the spiritual path and seek a way more befitting a Javanese ruler. For those who are willing to discipline themselves, as Sénapati did, there is the opportunity of seeing God and achieving true peace of mind. All this is possible by making use of the resources within the Javanese tradition itself - there is no need to seek wisdom in Mecca.

The second step is to ask whether the poem is merely about a philosophy of life or mystical experience, or whether there may be more, at an even deeper level. Perhaps some clues are to be found by looking at the time and place in which the poem was written, as they may, directly or indirectly, have provided its author with the inspiration or impulse to write.

In the 1870s Central Java was at peace. The Mangkunagaran was in fact prospering, due to the initiative of its able ruler, Mangkunagara IV, in establishing the sugar factories of Tasikmadu and Calamadu. The period cannot be characterized as one of turmoil or crisis, economic, religious or other. But it was certainly a time of change, even of challenge. The rail link between Surakarta and Semarang was completed in 1870, and extended to Yogyakarta soon after, leading to a great increase in contact with the outside world. The area of land being rented by Europeans for cultivating various crops in the Principalities was constantly expanding, and even Mangkunagara IV had difficulty in regaining control of his lands.

Although Islam and the Middle East are referred to in the Wédhatama, the West and Europeans are nowhere alluded to. But we would not be justified in thinking that the Mangkunagaran had no contact with Europeans - on the contrary, they were regular visitors, and the Mangkunagaran had the name of being open to European influence. Politically, the Dutch had had a stranglehold on the Javanese princes since the end of the Java War in 1830. It is thought that the developments witnessed in the fields of drama, music and literature during the second half of the century were in some way a reaction to this, a turning inwards and an attempt to assert superiority in areas where the outsiders would be unlikely to understand and hence could not interfere. A major proportion of Mangkunagara IV's oeuvre can be viewed as an effort to reinforce Javanese values and ideals of refinement, to support the court's conviction that their way of life and thinking was the best and hence worth defending against erosion from any quarter.

Our conclusion has then to be that the message of the Wédhatama is one of cultural identity. It says: We are Javanese, and we should be true to ourselves and follow our own way in the realm of spirituality, in order to find the power that our ancestors had and which is our right by inheritance. This is the Wédhatama, 'the highest wisdom'.

It is an irony of history that now, more than a century later and long after the departure of the colonial power, a similar situation can be said to obtain. There is a challenge from fundamentalist Islam on the one hand, and from the materialist West on the other. As a result there are those who seek a solution in a return to what is best in their own cultural heritage. Albeit hesitantly, they look about and try to find out what in fact that heritage is, what it means, and whether it can be developed and brought back to the people, to whom, after all, it belongs.

## Text

### I Pangkur/Canto I

No.  |Text  |Translation
--|--|--
1.  |Mingkar mingkur ing angkara<br>Akarana karenan mardi siwi<br>Sinawung resmining kidung<br>Sinuba sinukarta<br>Mrih kretarta pakartining ngèlmu luhung<br>Kang tumrap nèng tanah Jawa <br>Agama ageming aji  |Turning away from selfish motives,<br>As one is pleased to give instruction to sons,<br>It is cast in the form of a delightful song,<br>Finely finished and well turned,<br>In the hope that they may prosper in their practice of noble sciences<br>That pertain to the land of Java,<br>As the spiritual tradition adhered to by its kings.
2. |Jinejer nèng Wédhatama<br>Mrih tan kemba kembenganing pambudi<br>Mangka nadyan tuwa pikun<br>Yèn tan mikani rasa<br>Yekti sepi asepa lir sepah samun<br>Samangsané pakumpulan<br>Gonyak-ganyuk nglilingsemi   |It is set out in the Wédhatama,<br>So that they should not weary of turning it over in their minds,<br>Whereas though a man be old and bent,<br>If he has not grasped the essence,<br>Truly he is as empty and insipid as an abandoned quid,<br>And when people are gathered together in company<br>He is embarrassingly free-and-easy.   
3.   |Gugu karsané priyangga<br>Nora nganggo paparah lamun angling<br>Lumuh ingaran balilu<br>Uger guru aleman<br>Nanging janma ingkang wus waspadèng semu<br>Sinamun ing samudana<br>Sasadon ingadu manis  |He pleases himself what he does<br>And takes no forethought when he speaks,<br>He is unwilling to be called ignorant<br>And is always out for compliments,<br>But a person who has learnt to observe appearances<br>Hides his feelings behind a pleasant expression<br>And his conversation is in good taste.
4. |Si Pengung nora nglegéwa<br>Sangsayarda dénira cacariwis<br>Ngandhar-andhar angendhukur<br>Kandhané nora kaprah<br>Saya élok alangka longkangipun<br>Si Wasis waskitha ngalah<br> Ngalingi marang si Pingging|The Fool pays no attention<br>But prattles all the harder,<br>They stretch on and on, pile up and up,<br>Those tall stories of his,<br>Ever stranger, with seldom a break for breath;<br>The Wise Man finds it prudent to give in,<br>And thus he shields the Fool.
5. |Mangkono ngèlmu kang nyata<br>Sanyatané mung wèh reseping ati<br>Bungah ingaranan cubluk<br>Sukèng tyas yèn dèn-ina<br>Nora kaya si Punggung anggung gumunggung<br>Ugungan sadina-dina<br>Aja mangkono wong urip|Such is true wisdom,<br>In truth it only gives a deep delight,<br>One is happy to be dubbed a blockhead<br>And content to be treated with contempt.<br>Not like the Fool, always eager for praise,<br>And demanding attention all day long -<br>Let not your life be thus!
6. |Uripé sapisan rusak<br>Nora mulur nalaré ting saluwir<br>Kadi ta guwa kang sirung<br>Sinerang ing maruta<br>Gumarenggeng anggereng anggung gumrunggung<br>Pindha padhané si Mudha<br>Prandéné paksa kumaki|Once his life is in confusion,<br>He does not think things through but is a scatterbrain;<br>He is like a dark cave<br>Blown upon by the wind,<br>Sighing and soughing, rushing and roaring;<br>This is the image of the Fool,<br>Nonetheless he insists on playing the wise old man.
7. |Kikisané mung sapala<br>Palayuné ngendelken yayah wibi<br>Bangkit tur bangsaning luhur<br>Lah iya ingkang rama<br>Balik sira sarawungan baé durung<br>Mring atining tata-krama<br>Gon-anggon agama suci|His horizons are only limited:<br>He puts his faith in his parents -<br>For they are sensible and of noble family!<br>Oh yes, your father is,<br>You on the other hand are not yet even acquainted<br>With the heart of good manners<br>That pertains to a pure way of life.
8. |Socaning jiwangganira<br>Jer katara lamun pocapan pasthi<br>Lumuh kasor kudu unggul<br>Sumengah sosongaran<br>Yèn mangkono kena ingaran katungkul<br>Karem ing rèh kaprawiran<br>Nora énak iku kaki|The defects of your character<br>Will surely come to light when you talk to others,<br>You refuse to be outdone, you insist on standing out,<br>Conceited and swaggering;<br>In that case you could be said to be absorbed in self,<br>You think of nothing but being 'king of the castle',<br>And that is not a pleasant thing, my boy.
9. |Kekerané ngèlmu Karang<br>Kakarangan saking bangsaning gaib<br>Iku borèh paminipun<br>Tan rumasuk ing jasad<br>Amung anèng sajabaning daging kulup<br>Yèn kapengkok pancabaya<br>Ubayané balénjani|The secrets of the magic arts<br>Are products of the realms of the invisible;<br>They can be compared to a cosmetic<br>Which does not enter the body<br>But remains only on the outside, my boy;<br>If you encounter real perils<br>Their promises will fail you.
10. |Marma ing sabisa-bisa<br>Babasané muriha tyas basuki<br>Puruitaa kang patut<br>Lan trap ing angganira<br>Ana uga angger-ugering kaprabun<br>Abon-aboning panembah<br>Kang kambah ing siyang ratri|Therefore for as far as you are able<br>As the saying has it, strive for peace of mind;<br>Take tuition in what is fitting<br>And applicable to yourself;<br>There are also the rules and principles of kingship,<br>And all that pertains to worship<br>Which have to be observed by day and night.
11. |Iku kaki takokena<br>Marang para sarjana kang martapi<br>Mring tapaking tepa tulus<br>Kawawa nahen hawa<br>Wruhanira mungguh sanyataning ngèlmu<br>Tan pasthi nèng janma wreda<br>Tuwin mudha sudra kaki|Enquire after this, my boy,<br>With the scholars who live an austere life,<br>In the footsteps of an auspicious example<br>And capable of restraining their desires;<br>You should realize with regard to true wisdom<br>That it is not perforce to be found among the senior<br>Or either the ignorant and lowly, my boy.
12. |Sapantuk wahyuning Allah<br>Gya dumilah mangulah ngèlmu bangkit<br>Bangkit mikat rèh mangukut<br>Kukutaning jiwangga<br>Yèn mangkono kena sinebut wong sepuh<br>Liring sepuh sepi hawa<br>Awas roroning atunggil|Whoever obtains God's inspiration<br>Soon shines at the practice of the science of insight,<br>He is skilled at grasping the ways of gathering up<br>The scattered pieces of himself;<br>In that case he may be called an 'old' man -<br>'Old' in the sense of free from desires,<br>With clear insight into the two-in-one.
13. |Tan samar pamoring suksma<br>Sinuk maya winahya ing asepi<br>Sinimpen telenging kalbu<br>Pambukané warana<br>Tarlèn saking liyep-layaping aluyut<br>Pindha pesating supena<br>Sumusup ing rasa jati|He sees unclouded the union of the soul,<br>Piercing the illusion, it is revealed to him in stillness;<br>Locked in the depths of his heart<br>Is the lifting of the veil;<br>It is no different from the twilight twixt sleep and waking:<br>With the swiftness of a dream<br>The full meaning dawns upon him.
14. |Sajatiné kang mangkana<br>Wus kakenan nugrahaning Hyang Widhi<br>Bali alaming asuwung<br>Tan karem karaméyan<br>Ingkang sipat wisésa winisésa wus<br>Mulih mula-mulanira<br>Mulané wong anom sami|Truly such a man<br>Has been granted grace by God;<br>He has returned to the realm of Void<br>And takes no pleasure in mundane matters.<br>What had the quality of power has itself been overpowered,<br>is done,<br>And is reduced to its first origins,<br>And hence, young people,

### II Sinom/Canto II

No.  |Text  |Translation
--|--|--
1. |Nulada laku utama<br>Tumrap ing wong tanah Jawi<br>Wong agung ing Ngèksiganda<br>Panembahan Sénapati<br>Kapati amarsudi<br>Sudané hawa lan nepsu<br>Pinesu tapa brata<br>Tanapi ing siyang ratri<br>Amamangun karyénak tyasing sasama|Take as model an excellent rule of life<br>Appropriate to the people of Java:<br>That of the Great Man of Mataram,<br>Panembahan Sénapati.<br>With all his strength he devoted himself<br>To the lessening of desire and passionate impulses;<br>By applying himself to ascetic practices<br>Both day and night<br>He strove to please his fellow men.<br>
2. |Samangsané pasamuwan<br>Mamangun marta martani<br>Sinambi ing saben mangsa<br>Kala-kalaning asepi<br>Lalana tèki-tèki<br>Gayuh géyonganing kayun<br>Kayungyun eninging tyas<br>Sanityasa pinrihatin<br>Puguh panggah cegah dhahar lawan néndra|Whenever he was in company<br>He strove to be gentle and comforting,<br>But at the same time whenever<br>He retired to solitude,<br>He would roam with the sole aim<br>Of grasping what his heart yearned for:<br>He was captivated by peace of mind<br>And constantly took pains to find it -<br>Firmly and steadfastly he resisted the desire for food and sleep.
3. |Saben méndra saking wisma<br>Lalana laladan sepi<br>Ngingsep sepuhing sopana<br>Mrih pana pranawèng kapti<br>Tis-tising tyas marsudi<br>Mardawaning budya tulus<br>Mesu rèh kasudarman<br>Nèng tepining jalanidhi<br>Sruning brata kataman wahyu dyatmika|Each time he set forth from his home<br>To wander in desolate regions,<br>He would savour the hardships of the way<br>To gain insight and understanding of his desires.<br>He strove for inner detachment<br>And the amenity of sincerity,<br>He exerted himself to the utmost for true virtue,<br>And there on the shore of the ocean<br>In the midst of his austerities he was visited by an inward sign:
4. |Wikan wengkoning samodra<br>Kèderen wus dèn-ideri<br>Kinemat kamot ing driya<br>Rinegem sagegem dadi<br>Dumadya angratoni<br>Nenggih Kangjeng Ratu Kidul<br>Dedel gayuh gagana<br>Umara marek maripih<br>Sor prabawa lan wong agung Ngèksiganda|He surveyed the circumference of the sea<br>Roundabout, and having swept it with his eye,<br>He entered it into his heart by magic,<br>Where he held it, no bigger than a fistful,<br>So that he might take dominion over it,<br>And verily the Queen of the South Sea<br>Arose soaring into the sky<br>And came before him in beseeching,<br>Her majesty inferior to the Great Man of Mataram.
5. |Dahat dénira aminta<br>Sinupeket pangkat kanthi<br>Jroning alam palimunan<br>Ing pasaban saben sepi<br>Sumanggem anyanggemi<br>Ing karsa kang wus tinamtu<br>Pamrihé mung aminta<br>Supangaté tèki-tèki<br>Nora kétang teken janggut suku jaja|Earnestly she begged<br>To be allied to him as companion,<br>In the realms of the invisible<br>Whenever he frequented lonely places.<br>She took upon herself to undertake<br>Whatever he might determine as his wish;<br>Her intention was merely to beg<br>The blessing from his austerities,<br>Never heeding all the pains it might entail.
6. |Prajanjiné abipraya<br>Saturun-turun ing wuri<br>Mangkono trahing awirya<br>Yèn amasah mesu budi<br>Dumadya glis dumugi<br>Iya ing sakarsanipun<br>Wong agung Ngèksiganda<br>Nugrahané praptèng mangkin<br>Trah-tumerah darahé padha wibawa|They concluded an agreement<br>For all his descendants in later days:<br>Thus those of noble house,<br>Should they apply themselves to mental discipline,<br>Would speedily achieve<br>Whatever they desired.<br>The Great Man of Mataram,<br>This favour bestowed on him has lasted till today:<br>Generation by generation those of his blood have enjoyed the same power.
7. |Ambawani tanah Jawa<br>Kang padha jumeneng aji<br>Satriya dibya sumbaga<br>Tan lyan trahing Sénapati<br>Pan iku pantes ugi<br>Tinulad labetanipun<br>Ing sakuwasanira<br>Enaké lan jaman mangkin<br>Sayektiné tan bisa ngepleki kuna|They have held sway over the land of Java,<br>Those who reigned as king,<br>Famed as excellent noblemen,<br>None other than the seed of Sénapati;<br>So it is fitting also<br>To take their merits as example,<br>With all your strength<br>As befits this present age,<br>Which in fact can never match the past.
8. |Lowung kalamun tinimbang<br>Aurip tanpa prihatin<br>Nanging ta ing jaman mangkya<br>Pra mudha kang dèn-karemi<br>Manulad nélad Nabi<br>Nayakèng rat Gusti Rasul<br>Anggung ginawé umbak<br>Saben séba mampir masjid<br>Ngajap-ajap mujijat tibaning drajat|It is preferable when compared<br>To living without care.<br>However, at the present time<br>What the youth are obsessed with<br>Is taking as their model and example the Prophet,<br>Guide of the World, the Apostle of God.<br>They constantly make this grounds for boasting<br>And whenever they attend court they call first at the mosque,<br>In the hope of a miracle and carrying off an official position.
9. |Anggung anggubel saréngat<br>Saringané tan dèn-wruhi<br>Dalil dalaning ijemak<br>Kiyasé nora mikani<br>Katungkul mungkul sami<br>Béngkrakan mring masjid agung<br>Kalamun maca kutbah<br>Lalagoné Dhandhang-Gendhis<br>Swara arum ngumandang céngkok Palaran|Constantly they appeal to Islamic law,<br>But the essence they do not grasp;<br>Of the explanation of Quranic texts, the path of consensus,<br>And argument by analogy they know nothing.<br>They give themselves over assiduously<br>To swaggering off to the Great Mosque;<br>When reading the sermon<br>They adopt the metre Dhandhanggula,<br>With a sweet voice, echoing long, in the Palaran style.
10. |Lamun sira paksa nulad<br>Tuladhaning Kangjeng Nabi<br>O nggèr kadohan panjangkah<br>Wateké tan betah kaki<br>Rèhné ta sira Jawi<br>Sathithik baé wus cukup<br>Aywa guru aleman<br>Nélad kas ngeblegi pekih<br>Lamun pengkuh pangangkah yekti karahmat|If you insist on imitating<br>The example of the Prophet,<br>Oh, my dear, you overreach yourself:<br>As a rule you will not hold out long.<br>Seeing that you are Javanese,<br>Just a little will be enough.<br>Do not set your heart on praise from others,<br>Imitating precisely and acting just like a scholar of Islamic law;<br>Providing you are firm in your aspirations, you will surely be blessed.
11. |Nanging énak ngupaboga<br>Rèhné ta tinitah langip<br>Apa ta suwitèng nata<br>Tani tanapi agrami<br>Mangkono mungguh mami<br>Paduné wong dahat cubluk<br>Durung wruh cara Arab<br>Jawaku baé tan ngenting<br>Parandéné paripeksa mulang putra|However, it is best to try to earn a living,<br>Seeing that we are created needy -<br>Whether you be in the service of the king,<br>A farmer, or again a trader.<br>Such is my opinion,<br>That is, a person who is very dull -<br>I know no Arabic,<br>And even my Javanese is not perfect;<br>Nevertheless I make bold to teach my sons.
12. |Saking duk maksih taruna<br>Sadhéla wus anglakoni<br>Abérag marang agama<br>Maguru anggering haji<br>Sawadiné tyas mami<br>Banget wediné ing bésuk<br>Pranatan akir jaman<br>Tan tutug kaselak ngabdi<br>Nora kober sembahyang gya tinimbalan|From the time when I was still a young fellow,<br>For a while I led an ascetic life,<br>I was passionately religious<br>And took lessons from any Haji who happened by.<br>The actual motive in my heart<br>Was a great fear of the future,<br>Of what is ordained for the end of time,<br>But before I could finish I had to go into service -<br>I had no time for prayers, for I was soon summoned.
13. |Marang ingkang asung pangan<br>Yèn kasuwèn dèn-dukani<br>Bubrah kawur ing tyasingwang<br>Lir kiyamat saben ari<br>Bot Allah apa Gusti<br>Tambuh-tambuh solahingsun<br>Lawas-lawas graita<br>Rèhné ta suta priyayi<br>Yèn muriha dadi kaum temah nistha|By him who supplied my daily bread<br>And if I was late I would be blamed;<br>My heart was disturbed and puzzled,<br>And each day was like the Day of Judgement.<br>Which was more important, God or my lord?<br>I was always in a quandary as to what to do.<br>By and by I realized<br>That as I was the son of an official,<br>If I should strive to be a Kaum I would degrade myself -
14. |Tuwin ketib suragama<br>Pan ingsun nora winaris<br>Angur baya ngantepana<br>Pranatan wajibing urip<br>Lampahan angluluri<br>Aluraning pra luluhur<br>Kuna-kumunanira<br>Kongsi tumekèng samangkin<br>Kikisané tan lyan amung ngupaboga|And a Ketib or Suragama likewise,<br>For I had not inherited such a place.<br>It would probably be preferable to adhere to<br>The rule that in life it is one's duty<br>To follow the course<br>Traced out by our forefathers,<br>From the earliest times<br>Right down to the present day,<br>Which amounts to no more than merely earning a living.
15. |Bonggan kang tan mrelokena<br>Mungguh ugering aurip<br>Uripé lan tri prakara<br>Wirya arta tri winasis<br>Kalamun kongsi sepi<br>Saka wilangan tetelu<br>Telas tilasing janma<br>Aji godhong jati aking<br>Temah papa papariman ngulandara|It is irresponsible not to place due weight<br>On the basic principles of life -<br>One's life has three things:<br>Status, property and, thirdly, skills.<br>If you come to be lacking<br>In this threesome,<br>You have lost all trace of humanity,<br>Are worth no more than dry teak leaves,<br>And end up in misery, beggary and vagabondage.
16. |Kang wus waspada ing patrap<br>Mangayut ayat winasis<br>Wasana wosing jiwangga<br>Melok tanpa aling-aling<br>Kang ngalingi kalingling<br>Wenganing rasa tumlawung<br>Kèksi saliring jaman<br>Angelangut tanpa tepi<br>Yèku aran tapa tapaking Hyang Suksma|He who has clear insight into the right course of action<br>Is skilled at pursuing his aims,<br>Till finally the core of his own self<br>Is plain to see, without a veil.<br>That which veiled it he examines closely<br>And then the essence is laid wide open;<br>He views all ages,<br>His mind's eye ranging limitlessly -<br>This is what is meant by practising austerities in the footsteps of Hyang Sukma.
17. |Mangkono janma utama<br>Tuman tumanem ing sepi<br>Ing saben rikala mangsa<br>Masah amamasuh budi<br>Lairé anetepi<br>Ing réh kasatriyanipun<br>Susila anor-raga<br>Wignya met tyasing sasami<br>Yèku aran wong barèk bérag agami|Such is the perfect man -<br>He is accustomed to being deeply rooted in solitude;<br>Time and again<br>He subdues his will and disciplines his designs;<br>In outward things he fulfils<br>The duties of his noble station;<br>He is well-mannered, self-effacing,<br>And skilled at winning the hearts of his fellow men.<br>This is what is meant by a man who is a paragon and zealous for his philosophy.
18. |Ing jaman mengko pan ora<br>Arahé para taruni<br>Yèn antuk tuduh kang nyata<br>Nora pisan dèn-lakoni<br>Banjur jujurken kapti<br>Kakèkné arsa winuruk<br>Ngandelken gurunira<br>Pandhitané praja sidik<br>Tur wus manggon pamucungé mring makripat|Nowadays that is not<br>The course followed by young people;<br>When they get clear directions<br>They do not put them into practice at all;<br>They have their own way,<br>And would even teach their grandfather;<br>They put their trust in their own masters -<br>Their pundits are clever and clairvoyant!<br>And they have a habit of making a riddle out of seeing God.

### III Pucung/Canto III
No.  |Text  |Translation
--|--|--
1.  |Ngèlmu iku<br>Kalakoné kanthi laku<br>Lekasé lawan kas<br>Tegesé kas nyantosani<br>Setya budya pangekesé dur angkara|  Knowledge<br>Goes together with practice,<br>It is effected with firmness:<br>The meaning of firmness is steeling oneself,<br>That is, with determination striving to master the evil urges of egotism.
2. |Angkara gung<br>Nèng angga anggung gumulung<br>Gogolonganira<br>Triloka lekeré kongsi<br>Yèn dèn-umbar ambabar dadi rubéda|Selfishness dominates<br>In man's physical being: they roll ever onward,<br>All its kinds united,<br>Till they encompass the three worlds -<br>If given its head it will swell up and bring trouble.
3. |Béda lamun<br>Wus sengsem réhing asamun<br>Semuné ngaksama<br>Sasamané bangsa sisip<br>Sarwa sarèh saking mardi martotama|It is quite different when<br>One loves to be quiet,<br>Appearing to forgive<br>One's fellow men who are in error,<br>Calm in all things, through devoting oneself to the highest gentleness.
4. |Taman limut<br>Durgamèng tyas kang wèh limput<br>Kèrem ing karamat<br>Karana karoban ing sih<br>Sihing suksma ngebda saardi gengira|Not dismayed<br>By the uneasiness of mind that causes unclearness,<br>But inundated in marks of divine favour,<br>By being overwhelmed by love,<br>God's love, which grows as great as a mountain.
5. |Yèku patut<br>Tinulad-tulad tinurut<br>Sapituduhira<br>Aja kaya jaman mangkin<br>Kèh pra mudha mundhi dhiri rapal makna|That is the one fitting<br>To be always taken as an example<br>And all his directions followed.<br>Let it not be like the present time:<br>Many are the young people who boast of their theological knowledge.
6. |Durung pecus<br>Kasusu kaselak besus<br>Amaknani rapal<br>Kaya sayid weton Mesir<br>Pendhak-pendhak angendhak gunaning janma|Though not yet qualified,<br>They are in a hurry to show off;<br>The way they interpret Arabic texts<br>Is like a Sayid from Egypt:<br>Every time they belittle the abilities of others.
7. |Kang kadyèku<br>Kalebu wong ngaku-aku<br>Akalé alangka<br>Elok jawané dèn-mohi<br>- Paksa langkah ngangkah mèt kawruh ing Mekah|Such persons<br>Can be reckoned as frauds:<br>Where is their common sense?<br>Oddly enough they deny their Javanese soul,<br>And at all costs bend their steps to Mecca in search of knowledge.
8. |Nora weruh<br>Rosing rasa kang rinuruh<br>Lumeket ing angga<br>Anggeré padha marsudi<br>Kana kéné kaanané nora béda|They do not comprehend<br>That the core of the essence which they seek<br>Is closely tied to their own self;<br>Providing you practise hard,<br>It makes no difference if you are here or there.
9. |Uger lugu<br>Dénta mrih pralebdèng kalbu<br>Yèn kabul kabuka<br>Ing drajat kajating urip<br>Kaya kang wus winahya sekar Srinata|If only you are sincere<br>In aiming at a thorough understanding,<br>When this is granted then the way is opened<br>To the station you desire in life,<br>As already revealed in the Sinom canto.
10. |Basa ngèlmu<br>Mupakaté lan panemu<br>Pasahé lan tapa<br>Yèn satriya tanah Jawi<br>Kuna-kuna kang ginilut tri prakara|But as for knowledge,<br>Its acceptance is achieved by considered judgement,<br>And it is made effective through asceticism.<br>The Javanese nobleman<br>From olden times has cultivated three things:
11. |Lila lamun<br>Kélangan nora gegetun<br>Trima yèn kataman<br>Sak serik samèng dumadi<br>Tri legawa nalangsa srah ing Bathara|He acquiesces when<br>Stricken by loss, and is not taken aback;<br>He resigns himself when a victim<br>Of annoyance from his fellow creatures;<br>And thirdly he willingly and humbly surrenders himself to the Lord;
12. |Bathara gung<br>Inguger graning jajantung<br>Jenek Hyang Wisésa<br>Sana pasenetan suci<br>Nora kaya si Mudha mudhar angkara|The Lord Most High<br>Is firmly seated in the pinnacle of his heart,<br>And the Almighty is well pleased<br>To be enthroned there in a pure retreat.<br>This is not like the young fellow who gives free rein to selfish<br>impulses:
13. |Nora uwus<br>Karemé anguwus-uwus<br>Uwosé tan ana<br>Mung janjiné muring-muring<br>Kaya buta buteng betah nganiaya|Without an end<br>Is his addiction to sharp words -<br>They have no content,<br>It is just for the sake of grumbling,<br>Like an irascible demon who keeps on tormenting people.
14. |Sakèh luput<br>Ing angga tansah linimput<br>Linimpet ing sabda<br>Narka tan ana udani<br>Lumuh ala ardané ginawé gada|All the faults<br>In himself are always obscured,<br>Covered up with words,<br>On the assumption that no-one will notice;<br>Being refractory, his malicious desires he makes into a cudgel.
15. |Durung punjul<br>Kasusu kaselak jujul<br>Kaseselan hawa<br>Cupet kapepetan pamrih<br>Tangèh nedya anggambuh mring Hyang Wisésa|He has not yet attained prominence,<br>Yet it is already too much for him;<br>Since he is stuffed tight with passions<br>He falls short and fails to achieve his object;<br>He is far from intending to become an intimate of the Almighty.

### IV. Gambuh/Canto IV
No.  |Text  |Translation
--|--|--
1. |Samengko ingsun tutur<br>Sembah catur supaya lumuntur<br>Dhihin raga cipta jiwa rasa kaki<br>Ing kono lamun katemu<br>Tandha nugrahaning Manon|Now I shall teach<br>The four kinds of worship, so that you may acquire them:<br>Firstly, that of the body, then thought, the soul and the essence,<br>my boy;<br>The acquisition of these<br>Is a sign of favour from the All-Seeing.
2. |Sembah raga puniku<br>Pakartiné wong amagang laku<br>Susuciné asarana saking warih<br>Kang wus lumrah limang waktu<br>Wantu wataking wawaton|Worship with the body<br>Is the work of an apprentice;<br>Its ablution is made with water,<br>And the usual custom is five times;<br>This has the nature of an established rule.
3. |Ing nguni-uni durung<br>Sinarawung wulang kang sinerung<br>Lagi iki bangsa kas ngetokken anggit<br>Mintokken kawignyanipun<br>Saréngaté élok-élok|In former times secret teachings<br>Were not yet made public,<br>But now punctilious people make a show of their fabrications,<br>In order to let their cleverness be seen -<br>Their precepts are most strange.
4. |Thithik kaya santri Dul<br>Gajeg kaya santri brai kidul<br>Sauruté Pacitan pinggir pasisir<br>Ewon wong kang padha gugu<br>Anggeré padha nyalemong|It is rather like the adherents of the Agama Dul,<br>As I recall, like the santri birai of the south,<br>Along the Pacitan coast.<br>There are thousands who believe them<br>Whenever they start talking gibberish.
5. |Kasusu arsa weruh<br>Cahyaning Hyang kinira yèn karuh<br>Ngarep-arep urub arsa dèn-kurebi<br>Tan weruh yèn urip iku<br>Akalé kaliru enggon|They are in a hurry to see<br>The divine light that they imagine they know well;<br>They look forward to its glow in order to throw themselves<br>upon it;<br>They do not understand that such a life<br>Has its brains in the wrong place.
6. |Yèn ta jaman rumuhun<br>Tata titi tumrah tumaruntun<br>Bangsa sréngat tan winor lan laku batin<br>Dadi nora duwé bingung<br>Kang padha nembah Hyang Manon|Now in days gone by<br>Things were orderly and correct from one generation to the next,<br>Matters of Islamic law were not mingled with spiritual practice,<br>So it did not confuse<br>Those who worship the All-Seeing.
7. |Liré saréngat iku<br>Kena uga ingaranan laku<br>Dhingin ajeg kapindhoné ataberi<br>Pakolihé putraningsun<br>Nyenyeger badan mrih kaot|As for Islamic law,<br>It can also be called a discipline:<br>Firstly it calls for regularity, and in the second place for diligence.<br>Its use, my son,<br>Is to keep refreshing the body in order to improve it.
8. |Wong seger badanipun<br>Otot daging kulit balung sungsum<br>Tumrah ing rah mamarah antenging ati<br>Antenging ati nunungku<br>Angruwat ruweding batos|For when the body is refreshed,<br>Muscles, flesh, skin, bones and marrow,<br>This passes on to the blood, causing peace of mind.<br>The peace of mind becomes focussed<br>And banishes inner confusion.
9. |Mangkono mungguh ingsun<br>Ananging ta sarèhning asnafun<br>Béda-béda panduk panduming dumadi<br>Sayektiné nora jumbuh<br>Tékad kang padha linakon|Thus it is with regard to myself -<br>However, seeing that men are not all alike,<br>The direction and lot of the living are various;<br>In fact there is no similarity<br>Between the paths that are embarked upon.
10. |Nanging ta paksa tutur<br>Rèhné tuwa tuwasé mung catur<br>Bok lumuntur lantaraning rèh utami<br>Sing sapa temen tinemu<br>Nugraha geming kaprabon|However, I cannot help but give instruction,<br>And seeing that I am old, the gains are only four in number;<br>May a means of reaching the highest things be imparted.<br>Whoever strives sincerely will find<br>A favour of princely worth.
11. |Samengko sembah kalbu<br>Yèn lumintu uga dadi laku<br>Laku agung kang kagungan narapati<br>Patitis teteping kawruh<br>Meruhi marang kang momong|Now worship of the heart,<br>If it is sustained can also be a way of practising asceticism;<br>It is a grand way, such as befits a king.<br>It is precisely the certainty of knowledge<br>That leads us to acknowledge Providence.
12. |Suciné tanpa banyu<br>Amung nyunyuda ardaning kalbu<br>Pambukané tata titi ngati-ati<br>Atetep talatèn atul<br>Tuladan marang waspaos|Its ritual ablution is without water,<br>It consists simply of steadily lessening the impulses of the heart;<br>It opens with order, scrupulousness and caution,<br>It is steadfast, persevering and unwearying,<br>Being guided by clear insight,
13. |Mring jatining pandulu<br>Panduking don dadalan satuhu<br>Lamun lugu legutaning rèh maligi<br>Lagèhané tumalawung<br>Wenganing alam kinaot|By true vision,<br>That striving for the end is the real way.<br>When the habit of pure things is unalloyed,<br>Its particularities fade away into<br>The revelation of a higher world.
14. |Yèn wus kambah kadyèku<br>Sarat sarèh saniskarèng laku<br>Kalakoné saka eneng ening éling<br>Ilanging rasa tumlawung<br>Kono adiling Hyang Manon|When this path has been embarked upon<br>The means is calmness in everything we do;<br>It is reached by inner stillness, clarity and mindfulness.<br>Feeling then dies away<br>And there we find the righteousness of the All-Seeing.
15. |Gagaré ngunggar kayun<br>Ngayun-ayun mring ayuning kayun<br>Bangsa anggit yèn ginigit nora dadi<br>Marma dèn-awas dèn-émut<br>Mring pamurunging lalakon|It fails when the will is given free rein<br>To hope for the finest it could wish;<br>That kind of fantasy when tested comes to nothing.<br>Therefore look sharply and be mindful<br>Of what brings about the downfall of endeavour.
16. |Samengko kang tinutur<br>Sembah katri kang sayekti katur<br>Mring Hyang Suksma suksmanen saari-ari<br>Arahen dipun kacakup<br>Sembahing jiwa sutèngong<br>|What is taught now<br>Is the third kind of worship, which verily is offered<br>To God; absorb yourself in it day by day,<br>Take care to master it,<br>This worship of the soul, my son!
17. |Sayekti luwih parlu<br>Ingaranan pupuntoning laku<br>Kalakuwan kang tumrap bangsaning batin<br>Suciné lan awas émut<br>Mring alaming lama amot|Truly it is more important<br>And can be called the culmination of the way;<br>It is a practice that relates to inward things.<br>Its ablution consists of insight and mindfulness,<br>Indulgent toward the past.
18. |Ruktiné ngangkah ngukut<br>Ngiket ngruket triloka kakukut<br>Jagad agung ginulung lan jagad alit<br>Dèn-kandel-kumandel kulup<br>Mring kelaping alam kono|One prepares for it by aiming to bring together,<br>Bind up and tightly tie the three worlds; being gathered up<br>The macrocosm is mastered by the microcosm.<br>Believe with your whole heart, my boy,<br>That you will catch a glimpse of the world yonder.
19. |Kelemé mawi limut<br>Kalamatan jroning alam kanyut<br>Sanyatané iku kanyataan kaki<br>Sajatiné yèn tan émut<br>Sayekti tan bisa amor|To sink in it brings forgetfulness,<br>And barely conscious one is swept into the universe;<br>In truth that is the truth, young man.<br>But if in fact you are not mindful,<br>You cannot really become a part of it.
20. |Pamèté saka luyut<br>Sarwa sarèh saliring panganyut<br>Lamun yitna kayitnan kang miyatani<br>Tarlèn mung pribadinipun<br>Kang katon tinonton kono|It is sought through a fading of the wakeful state,<br>Complete calm, and any means of inspiring rapture.<br>Providing you are watchful with a sure watchfulness,<br>It is no more than your own self<br>That there you look upon and view.
21. |Nging aywa salah surup<br>Kono ana sajatiné urub<br>Yèku urub pangarep uriping budi<br>Sumirat-sirat narawung<br>Kadya kartika katonton|But do not misunderstand me:<br>Yonder there is a true flame,<br>Which is the flame that leads the life of the spirit onward;<br>It shines brightly roundabout,<br>And looks just like a star.
22. |Yèku wenganing kalbu<br>Kabuka ta kang wengku-winengku<br>Wewengkoné wus kawengku nèng sirèki<br>Nging sira uga winengku<br>Mring kang pindha kartika byor|That is the heart opening,<br>The revelation of what contains and is contained.<br>Its whole content is contained within you,<br>But you yourself too are contained<br>By what was compared to a glittering star.
23. |Samengko ingsun tutur<br>Gantya sembah ingkang kaping catur<br>Sembah rasa karasa wosing dumadi<br>Dadiné wus tanpa tuduh<br>Mung kalawan kasing batos|Now I shall teach you<br>In its turn the fourth kind of worship,<br>The worship of the essence, which is felt to be the core of<br>creation.<br>How it happens cannot be pointed out,<br>Only that it is achieved by inner firmness.
24. |Kalamun durung lugu<br>Aja pisan wani ngaku-aku<br>Antuk siku kang mangkono iku kaki<br>Kena uga wenang muluk<br>Kalamun wus padha melok|If it is not yet pure,<br>You must never dare to claim it -<br>Such an action would reap wrath, my boy.<br>But you may and have a right to pride yourself,<br>If it is all equally obvious to you.
25. |Meloké ujar iku<br>Yèn wus ilang sumelanging kalbu<br>Amung kandel-kumandel marang ing takdir<br>Iku dèn-awas dèn-émut<br>Dèn-memet yèn arsa momot|The clear understanding of these words<br>Comes when anxiety has vanished from your heart,<br>When you simply put your trust in Providence.<br>Keep this in view, remember it;<br>Do your utmost if you wish to grasp it.

## Comments

Experience has shown that the main difficulty of translation in this case is lexical. It was found that the meanings of particular words, especially ones from the literary idiom, were far from complete in any given dictionary, not to mention the obstacle of being rendered into a Dutch which is anything but a model of clarity. In general, however, for a work such as this one can best refer to the dictionary of Gericke and Roorda (1901); those of Jansz (1913) and Poerwadarminta (1939) also have their merits, but those of Pigeaud (1938a) and Horne (1974) have limited usefulness.

Valuable information on the poetical conventions of literary Javanese can be obtained from Ras 1982:309-37.

In the following comments, I refers to canto, 1 to stanza, and a etc.
to line within the stanza.

I.  |  
--|---
1a |mingkur contains an allusion to the metre of this canto, Pangkur.
1c |kidung: 'song', in fact poetry in macapat metres, which is intended to be sung.
1e | ngèlmu: on the meaning of this key concept, see the Introduction.
1g | agama: 'spiritual tradition', cf. also I.7g and II.17i. Normally translated as 'religion', but this is somewhat too narrow in this context, as it means more than mere outward practice, or even articles of belief: a way of thinking and living, an orientation toward the invisible world, which was more all-pervasive in Java than in the modern Western world. Note that the original Sanskrit agama has the meaning of 'something handed down, tradition'.
2a | Wédhatama: title of the work, translatable with 'highest wisdom'; wédha, also wéda, is from Skt. veda (thus not veda, vedha or veddha), 'knowledge, true or sacred knowledge or lore'; tama is from Skt. uttama, 'uppermost, highest, chief'.
2c | tuwa pikun: 'old and bent'; the idea is that advanced age should have brought wisdom.
2f | pakumpulan: 'gathered in company', i.e. in social situations. It is noteworthy that the possession of wisdom or lack of it is evident in one's manners, so ngèlmu extends into the realm of conduct and social relations.
3b | paparah: 'forethought'; also found in the form parah-parah (see Pigeaud 1938a s.v. parah III).
6b | ting saluwir: see Gericke and Roorda under suwir. The form suggests a number of ideas in disorder, a state of indecision or inconsistency.
7g | gon-anggon: 'pertain to'; see Pigeaud 1938a under anggon, anggon-anggon, 'belonging to'.
8a | soca, also spelt sotya, is here probably a 'knot (in wood), hence a defect, not a 'jewel', as it is faults that are being discussed.
9a | ngèlmu Karang: 'the magic arts'; Drewes (1969:11) writes: 'As is known, Javanese literature more than once mentions the famous religious school (pèsantren) which is supposed to have been established in Karan in former times and where mysticism, and everything which was associated with it in the practices of the brotherhoods (tarekat), was energetically pursued. [...] The name of the Karan school has furthermore remained known because the performances given by adepts in trance spread from Karan over the whole of Java under the name of nelmu Karan, the arts of the fakir.' Karang is thought to have been located in Banten, West Java (Pigeaud 1938b:260).
9b | bangsaning gaib: 'the realms of the invisible', lit. spirits, invisible beings.
12cd | mangukut; kukutan: also spelt kukud. Ngukud means 'to gather up (things that have been laid out) and leave'; these things are kukudan. The translation is only tentative.
12g | roroning atunggil: 'the two-in-one'; this is a phrase familiar from Javanese mysticism, expressing the dual unity of servant and Master. They are two, and yet they are one (Zoetmulder 1935: Chapter VI).
13a | pamor: 'union'; the spiritual union referred to is that between kawula and gusti, the servant and his Lord.
14g | wong anom sami: contains a sound-association with the name of the next metre, Sinom. Note that the sentence continues on, over the metrical boundary.

II.  |  
--|---
1a  |  laku: 'rule of life', another key term in this poem. It should be borne in mind that the word contains several nuances of meaning: way of going, course, conduct, ascetic rule of life. In 2i it is explicitly stated that Sénapati's ascetic practices included resisting the desire for food and sleep. This is typical of Javanese thinking: in order to win something valuable, for example power, we have to exercise willpower to give something up.
1c | Ngèksiganda is Mataram,; Sénapati (d. 1601) had his headquarters at Kota Gedé in Mataram. He is regarded as founder of the dynasty, and he took over power from Pajang. On his life see De Graaf 1954.
3c | ngingsep: 'savour', lit. 'suck up'. Sepuh is the water for tempering (hardening) steel in the process of forging (a kris, for example). The metaphor is applied to the hardships of the way that Sénapati chose to follow.
4  | We read here how Sénapati's exertions were rewarded with dominion; his relation with Kangjeng Ratu Kidul, the goddess who has her palace under the sea off the south coast of Java, appears to be crucial. She is queen of the invisible beings of Java. When it is evident that Sénapati is superior, this means that the spirit world is also committed to helping him, and his sovereignty over Mataram (the land between the Southern Ocean and Mount Merapi) is thereby confirmed.  
5i | teken janggut suku jaja: an expression meaning lit. 'with beard as staff and chest as foot', i.e. making such an effort that one is flat-out.
6-7 | The pact concluded by Sénapati and Ratu Kidul also applies to his descendants (the princely families of Central Java), who will likewise enjoy special powers, due to the blessing bestowed on their ancestor.
7h | énaké: 'as befits'; cf. II.11a énak, 'it is best to [...]'.
7i | tan bisa ngepleki kuna: '[...] can never match the past': there has been a change or decline since the time of Sénapati. Sénapati remains the model to imitate, but it will be difficult to do so; the difference is obvious (though not made explicit), namely the fact that the colonial power has established a stranglehold over the Javanese.
8 | In response to this dilemma, some of the 'young' are now taking refuge in Islam, but this solution is ridiculed as unworthy. Note that there are two homonyms mudha, meaning 'young' and 'foolish'.
9 | The sincerity of their commitment is questioned; seeing that they understand nothing of the technicalities, they act either in the hope of advancement or just to show off in public.
9i  | céngkok Palaran: 'the Palar variation', a variation on the melody Dhandhanggula. Palar is a place to the south of Surakarta. Apparently this variation is felt to be particularly ornate or artificial.
10 | The drift of this whole stanza is that it is unnecessary for a Javanese to attempt to imitate the Prophet. The lines 'Seeing that you are Javanese, Just a little will be enough' are an unambiguous statement of this view.
11 | The argument now moves on to the need to be gainfully employed at work of some kind - what kind is immaterial. Three stations of life are listed, viz. an official, farmer and trader, but there is no implication that one is better than another. See further II.13.
12i | The sentence runs on to 13a.
12-13 | This passage contains a warning against fanaticism on the part of Muslims. Let those whose business it is concern themselves with such matters.
13i | kaum: a religious official (of low rank, usually in villages). The sentence runs on. Nistha, 'degraded', is strong language!
13-14 | The principle of descent is stressed: one should remain within one's own station in life, as determined by family, and not attempt to be something else. 'Be true unto thyself.'
14a | ketib: religious official (in large mosque, under the Pangulu). The term suragama is not to be found in the dictionaries, but cf. suranata, name of a corps of armed clergy in the service of the ruler. Could it be that the Suranata pertained to the Sunan, and that the Mangkunagara had a comparable group of servants, with a slightly different name?
14e | Baliswara for angluluri lampahan; angluluri is the same as ngluri or ngeluri, 'to follow, imitate'.
16b | mangayut: lit. 'to bind together'; ayat: is this the same as hayat, 'life'? Or is it 'a divine revelation'? Or is it Kawi for pangarah and karep? (Gericke and Roorda.) In any case it is not a verse from the Quran.
17a | janma utama: = insan kamil (Ar.), according to Professor Drewes.
17d | masah (also mangsah): 'to plane; file (teeth)'; 'to work well, be effective' (Gericke and Roorda).
17i | barèk: 'a paragon'? For agama see I.1.
18 | The tone here is clearly that of an old man, looking back, possibly a justification for dating the Wédhatama late in the career of its author.
18i | pamucung: 1. contains a sound-association with Pucung, the metre of the coming canto; 2. apparently a verbal substantive on the basis of pucung, referring to the custom of putting riddles in the metre Pucung (information from Ben Arps). A riddle in itself!

III.  |  
--|--
2d | triloka: 'the three worlds', is merely an expression of totality, as the universe consists of heaven, earth and the underworld. There is no mystical significance.
4a |  taman is merely an extended form of tan, 'not', and has nothing to do with gardens.
5e | rapal makna: lit. 'Arabic texts and their interpretation'.
7d  |  Mekah: this refers to the growing numbers of Indonesians who, as well as making the Pilgrimage, stayed for some years to study in Arabia.
9d  |  Srinata is a synonym of Sinom, referring to the preceding canto.
10a | basa here means 'as for', not 'speech'.
14d | lit. 'he is refractory, his desires are evil, (and this) is made into a cudgel'.
15d | Again the sense is somewhat forced, in order to accommodate a reference to the next metre, here Gambuh.

IV.  |  
--|--
3ab  |  Alternatively: '[...] restricted teachings were not yet made public'.
4a  |  The santri Dul or santri brai were a sectarian group of Muslims whose practices spread over parts of Java in the early part of the 19th century (see Pigeaud 1938b, paragraphs 310, 311). It is not known why the Pacitan area, south of Surakarta on the coast, should be mentioned in particular.
6d | duwé seems odd; gawé might be better.
9b | asnafun: Ar. 'of various sorts'.
10b | catur: 'four'; cf. 23b, where the fourth kind of worship is described.
11e | meruhi: among other meanings Jansz gives 'to acknowledge, believe in'.
13b | panduk means 'heading, direction' needed to reach a goal (Gericke and Roorda).
13d | tumaluwung, cf. tumlawung in 14d. Gericke and Roorda gives for tumlawong s.v. tlawong 'zich in een lang gerekten toon in de verte laten hooren', i.e. to be heard in a long drawn-out note in the distance, presumably fading away.
15c | ginigit: lit. 'bitten', hence probably 'tested with the teeth'.
17e | alaming lama amot is unclear to me. Lama means lawas, which is 'old, former', as well as 'long (of time)'. One of the meanings of amot is 'suited, capable, tolerant' (Gericke and Roorda s.v. mot).

## Bibliography

Ardani, Moh. 1988 Konsep sembah dan budiluhur dalam pemikiran Mangkunagara IV Surakarta, ditinjau dari pandangan Islam. (Ph.D. thesis, Institut Agama Islam Negeri Syarif Hidayatullah, Jakarta.)

Atmosaputro, Suranto and Martin F. Hatch 1972 'Serat Wédatama: a translation', Indonesia 14:157-81.

Behrend, T.E. 1987 The Serat Jatiswara; Structure and change in a Javanese poem. [Ph.D. thesis, Australian National University, Canberra.]

Darusuprapta 1985 'Wedhatama dan Wedhatama lanjutan', in Sulastin Sutrisno, Darusuprapto and Sudaryanto (eds), Bahasa sastra budaya; Ratna manikam untaian persembahan kepada Prof. Dr P.J. Zoetmulder, pp. 100-30. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.

Drewes, G.W.J. 1969 The admonitions of Seh Bari. The Hague: Nijhoff.
[KITLV, Bibliotheca Indonesica 4.]

Florida, N. n.d. [Unpublished lists of manuscripts of the Reksa Pustaka Library, Mangkunagaran, according to title, author and subject.]

Gericke, J.F.C. and T. Roorda, 1901 Javaansch-Nederlandsch handwoordenboek. Leiden: Brill.

Graaf, H.J. de 1954 De regering van Panembahan Sénapati Ingalaga. 's-Gravenhage: Nijhoff. [KITLV, Verhandelingen 13.]

Hadiwidjana, R.D.S. 1967 Tata-sastra. Jogja: U.P. Indonesia.

Hatch Jr, Martin Fellows 1980 Lagu, laras, layang; Rethinking melody in Javanese music. [Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y.]

Horne, E.C. 1974 Javanese-English dictionary. New Haven/London: Yale University Press.

Jansz, P. 1913 Practisch Javaansch-Nederlandsch woordenboek. Second edition. Semarang: Van Dorp. [First edition 1876.]

Padmasusastra, Ki 1899 Serat Dwidja Isjwara, anggitan dalem suwargi kangjeng gusti Pangéran Adipati Arya Mangkunagara IV, kawedalaken déning Ki Padmasusastra, tiyang mardika ingkang amarsudi kasusastran Jawi ing Surakarta. Soerakarta: Rusche.

Pigeaud, Th. 1927 'P.A.A. Mangkunagara als dichter', Djawa 7:238-44. 1928 (ed.) Volledige werken van Kangdjeng Goesti Pangeran Adipati Arja Mangkoenagara IV, verzameld en uitgegeven bij gelegenheid van de herdenking van zijn 120jarigen geboortedag. Derde deel: Zedekundige gedichten, brieven in dichtmaat, Salokantara. Soerakarta: Java Instituut. 1938a Javaans-Nederlands handwoordenboek. Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff. 1938b Javaanse volksvertoningen; Bijdrage tot de beschrijving van land en volk. Batavia: Volkslectuur. 1968 Literature of Java. Vol. II: Descriptive lists of Javanese manuscripts. The Hague: Nijhoff.

Poerwadarminta, W.J.S. 1939 Baoesastra Djawa. Groningen/ Batavia: Wolters.

Proudfoot, I. 1984 'Variation in a Malay folk-tale tradition', Review of Indonesian and Malaysian Affairs 18 (Summer):87-98.

Ras, J.J. 1982 Inleiding tot het modern Javaans. 's-Gravenhage: Nijhoff. [KITLV; Second edition 1985.]

Robson, S.O. 1979 'Notes on the early kidung literature', Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 135:300-22.

Sartono Kartodirdjo, A. Sudewa and Suhardjo Hatmosuprobo 1987-88 Beberapa segi etika dan etiket Jawa. [Yogyakarta:] Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Direktorat Jenderal Kebudayaan, Proyek Penelitian dan Pengkajian Kebudayaan Nusantara, Bagian Jawa.

Tanojo, R. 1963 Weddha Tama djinarwa. Surakarta: Trijasa.

Terjemahan 1975 Terjemahan Wedha-Tama; Karya K.G.P.A.A. Mangkunagoro IV Surakarta Hadiningrat. Surakarta: Yayasan Mangadeg, Seksi Hubungan Masyarakat dan Penerbitan.

Wédatama, Serat 1885 (or 1891) Serat Wédatama anggitan dalem suwargi panjenengan dalem Kangjeng Gusti Pangéran Adipati Arya Mangkunagara ingkang kaping sekawan. Surakarta: Vogel van der Heide.

Wiryakusuma, R.M.Ng. 1905 Tambangprono. Second printing. Soerakarta: Rusche.

Zoetmulder, P.J. 1935 Pantheisme en monisme in de Javaansche soeloeklitteratuur. Nijmegen: Berkhout [Ph.D. thesis, University of Leiden.) 1941 'Prijsvraag: Bekroonde vertaling "Serat Wédatama", Djawa 21:182-98.
