Roy E. Jordaan (ed.), In praise of Prambanan; Dutch essays on the Loro Jonggrang temple complex. Leiden: KITLV Press, 1996, xii + 259 pp. (Translation Series 26.] ISBN 90.6718.105.6. Price: NLG 50.00.

JOHN N. MIKSIC

Any contemporary archaeologist studying Indonesia is bound to develop a strong sense of admiration for the Dutch antiguarians who laid the foundation for this field of research. Working under difficult conditions, they formulated methods, theories and historical reconstructions which, albeit relatively late in their inception, compared favourably with other programs of restoration, interpretation and excavation conducted in what were then European colonies. Publications of the Netherlands Indies Archaeological Service give evidence of lively debates in which basic differences of opinion were frankly and meticulously aired. Careful recording and fieldwork were standardized soon after the formation of the Netherlands Indies Oudheidkundige Dienst (OD) in the early twentieth century. Even during the economic difficulties of the 1930s, much important research was conducted all over the sprawling archipelago. Specialists from other professions, such as doctors and engineers, also made important contributions to the subject, a fact which suggests that the image fostered by some Dutch authors themselves of Dutch colonial society as largely uninterested in anything beyond profits was not entirely accurate.

It is therefore worthy of a small celebration that these articles by Dutch scholars are now available in English. World War II brought a sudden halt to their labours; many reports of work in progress were destroyed, and many of the scholars themselves lost their lives. In the early 1950s the successor to the OD, the Dinas Purbakala, was able to conduct some important new projects, but the years between 1955 and 1970 were marked by an almost total cessation of publications on Indonesian archaeology as political and economic conditions in Indonesia reached a nadir.

In the mid-1970s the Dinas Purbakala was divided into two separate entities: the National Research Centre for Archaeology, or Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional (Puslit Arkenas) and the Directorate for the Preservation and Protection of the the National Heritage (Direktorat Perlindungan dan Pembinaan Peninggalan Sejarah dan Purbakala, Ditlit Binjarah), which has the task of historical preservation. One side-effect of this reorganization has been the dilution of communication between excavators, art historians and restorers of historic sites and monuments. Colonial-period scholars had the advantage of close collaboration between these two groups, and the fruits of their labours demonstrate a broad familiarity with several disparate fields, including architecture, sculpture, excavation techniques, philology, Indology and Javanology.

The articles translated from Dutch and made available in the work under review here bear abundant evidence of the merits of a seamless fabric of communication among scholars from different fields all brought to bear on common problems. One would love to have been a fly on the wall during the debates among the scholars which are summarized briefly in the Notulen or Minutes of the meetings of the Batavian Society! They must have been quite lively occasions. Their merit was the imposition, not of consensus, but of a common understanding of the problems to be tackled. Such an atmosphere is difficult to replicate even at the present time, with much more favourable tools of communication at our command. A social history of the OD would be an extremely interesting subject for research.

The Lara Jonggrang complex at Prambanan has been relatively neglected by scholars in comparison with that other jewel of ancient Indonesian civilization, Borobudur. One of the many factors responsible for this situation is that Borobudur was discovered in much better condition than Prambanan. The architecture of the Lara Jonggrang complex emphasized tall tapering forms, which came crashing down over a millennium as the result of earthquakes and plant growth. It has taken a century of research and restoration to make it possible once again to witness first-hand the majestic soaring sight of the complex's three main towers. Another reason for Lara Jonggrang's relative eclipse may be that Borobudur contains much more narrative art in the form of reliefs. Lara Jonggrang definitely deserves to be considered much more as an equal to Borobudur than it has yet received credit for. This publication goes part of the way toward rectifying that imbalance.

The translation is in general fluent and idiomatic, with only a few missteps ~ for instance, ‘appendages’ (p. 132) should be ‘appurtenances’ or ‘perguisites', Also, on page 133, the plural of talisman is given as 'talismen' it should be ‘talismans’, since the '-man’ syllable here does not derive from any connection to humans. Similarly, on page 211 'stringboards' should be ‘stringwalls’, Some problems arise in the translation of Indonesian words too. The word apit, meaning ‘flanking’, is translated several times as ‘wedged in’ or ‘hem|[med] in’. The translation of the Old Javanese Ramayana (pp. 48-9), on the other hand, is very pleasing and literate and deserves special commendation.

Translation One presents J.W. Ijzerman's article 'The Prambanan temple pits’, taken from his Beschrijving der oudheden nabij de grens der residentie's Soerakarta en Djogdjakarta (1891). This translation also reproduces some plates from that publication, but since the captions to them have been reduced so greatly as to be nearly illegible, and have been left untranslated, they are decorative rather than informative. The next translation, J.Ph. Vogel's ‘The first Prambanan Rama relief from BKI 77 (1921), discusses the relief which depicts a god, identifiable by his many attributes as Visnu, seated on a serpent in the middle of the ocean. To his right is his mount Garuda offering a flower, while to his left are a number of people who have apparently come to request something from Visnu. The fifteenth sarga of the first canto (Balakanda) of Valmiki's Ramayana says that the gods led by Brahma came to Visnu to request his intervention against Ravana. The question then arises as to whether this is the episode depicted on the first relief of Lara Jonggrang.

Valmiki portrays Visnu riding Garuda in response to Dasaratha’s sacrifice for a son, while Kalidasa in his Raghuwangsa says that the gods went to Visnu, just awakening in the ocean, while Garuda awaited nearby. This suggests that the sculptors of Lara Jonggrang used Kalidasa's version rather than Valmiki's. There is, however, no concrete evidence that the Raghuwangsa was known in Java. Vogel does not resolve this problem completely, contenting himself with the suggestion that the Javanese sculptors perhaps followed an oral tradition rather than any written text.

The next translation, "The Prambanan statues' by N.J. Krom, is taken from this scholar's Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche kunst. The excerpt translated here deals with the perception that the Durga and Agastya statues in two of the chambers in Lara Jonggrang seem too large for their backrests. This has given rise to the theory that these statues were not the original ones meant for this site. Other, simpler explanations can also be proposed, however, a simple lack of teamwork between artisans at the site, or a difference in aesthetic taste between ancient and contemporary viewers.

In ‘The god Brahma surrounded by Maharsi' by ED.K. Bosch (Oudheidkundig Verslag [OV, Archaeological Report] 1922), the images of rsi carved on the outside wall of the Brahma temple come under study. The temple exterior bears 27 such groups in all. Is there any significance in this number? According to the Visnu Purana, every Doapara era, Visnu, as an ‘editor’ or vyasa, divides the veda into four. This has happened 28 times, but the first time this occurred, the division was made by Brahma. Thus the rsi on the exterior of the Brahma temple may symbolize the 28 Veda Vyasa, with Brahma as the first. This is an interesting but speculative theory. More research on various examples of possible numerical symbolism on Lara Jonggrang might provide additional support for this idea, but the lack of study of this subject is typical of the relative neglect which has been Lara Jonggrang’s lot compared to (for instance) Borobudur.

The article by B. de Haan, 'Candi A and Candi B' (OV 1927) is an important work. It shows that the term 'oghana temples' sometimes applied to the two shrines in front of the Brahma and Visnu temples is a misnomer. Despite the fact that this has been known for a very long time, many visitors to Lara Jonggrang still receive this incorrect explanation. There is no evidence that statues of Garuda (Visnu's vahana) or Hamsa (Brahma's vahana) ever stood in Candis A and B, whether at Lara Jonggrang or any other Sivaite complex in Central Java.

The prolific archaeologist W.E. Stutterheim receives the honour of a translation of his article on "The arrangement of the Rama reliefs of Candi Loro Jonggrang and the course of the sun’ (originally published in the BKI in 1928). Stutterheim too concludes that the Ramayana shown on Lara Jonggrang does not follow the text ascribed to Valmiki. He attempts to show that the distribution of reliefs is governed by several factors outside the text itself. Rama's tise, on the east, his decline on the west, and second rise, back on the east, coincide with sun's course. (Stutterheim does not deal with the Ramayana reliefs on the Brahma temple, which was unrestored at the time this article was written.) Stutterheim tries to show that there are 60 scenes on the 24 Rama reliefs, but is not himself entirely convinced of this. The number 60 would correspond to another astronomical/calendrical unit. He also suggests, among other things, lunar/solar opposition and parallels to a wayang performance.

V.R. van Romondt's 'The reconstruction of the Siva temple at Prambanan’ (Djawa 20, 1940) provides a nice historic account of the project up to that time. This is followed by the best article by far in the collection: AJ. Bernet Kempers' 'Prambanan 1954' (BKI, 1955). This provides a very good chronology of colonial-period antiquarian activities at Lara Jonggrang. Bernet Kem716 Book Reviews

pers supplies invaluable anecdotes of the disruptions which occurred during, the 1940s, for example the havoc caused by the Indonesian Revolution, when most maps in the Prambanan office of the Archaeological Service were lost, and the violent battles around Prambanan during the Second Police Action of 1948, when the office as well as the Siva temple itself were hit by artillery fire, and visited by plunderers. He provides a detailed description of Lara Jonggrang in the style of NJ. Krom, which Krom himself could not do because the shrine had not been restored in his time.

More such translations are needed if Indonesian archaeology is to make quicker progress. Old publications contain much invaluable information which, if ignored, lead to incorrect assumptions, wasted effort due to repetition, and plain misunderstanding, which in turn can lead (and sometimes has led) to poor restorations. I shall be happy to have this set of translations, especially the article by Bernet Kempers, available for students. More of the works of Bernet Kempers, in particular his Herstel in eigen waarde, should also be translated. He was the most important modern author who wrote prolific ally in Dutch. Modern Indonesian archaeological students, although required to study Dutch, are increasingly unable to make use of the colonial-period materials. An English (or Indonesian) translation would be of great use to future archaeologists working there.

The translations follow an extended introduction. Some of the works seem to have been selected for inclusion not primarily on the basis of their usefulness in conveying a rounded view of the Lara Jonggrang complex, but because they tend to support certain theories of the introduction's author. Certain articles not found here could have helped to convey a more complete and accurate idea of the complex history and meaning. The discussion of the derivation of the name 'Prambanan' (p. 11), for instance, does not mention J.G. de Casparis' explanation (Prasasti Indonesia I; Inscripties uit de GailendraTijd, Bandung: Nix, 1950:165), which shows that the name most probably was derived from Pangramwan, the name of a village in the vicinity of the temple which is frequently mentioned in inscriptions in connection with religious authorities. The tendency to neglect De Casparis' work is further exemplified in the discussion of the location of Medang (which is consistently mis-spelled 'Mendang!).

‘The author lacks some information regarding the recent phase of the restoration of Lara Jonggrang. For instance, he ‘was often amazed by the presence at the temple of labourers chiseling stone, something I found difficult to reconcile with the demands of an authentic reconstruction’ (p. 18). In footnote 6 he adds that 'the OD would have attached a small lead seal to the stone, which I was not able to detect on the stone in question’. The practice of Book Reviews 717

adding new stone to replace lost pieces of Javanese temples goes back to Van Erp's restoration of Borobudur. The round stupas on the upper terraces of Borobudur were badly damaged by looters, so Van Erp, in order to reconstruct them, had to replace more than 50 percent of the original stone blocks. True, the practice of chiselling new stone (or brick, in the case of some temples) was then, and still remains, controversial. Many scholars would prefer that little if any new stone be inserted into the old structures. However, the strong pressure from tourism developers to recreate something more 'marketable' with which to attract visitors to temple sites has resulted in a restoration mania all over Indonesia. Whether this actually increases the attraction of the sites is a question which has never been seriously examined.

The reason for discontinuing the use of lead seals on new stones from original blocks is that most of the seals were long ago pried out by enterprising young boys to use for fishing weights. Indonesian restorers have invented a new substitute, made from plastic, which has no attraction for those in need of materials to re-use for contemporary purposes.

The author advances several theories about Lara Jonggrang which are at variance with the consensus obtaining among scholars. Two of the principal new ideas propounded here concern the dating of the complex and the identity of its builders. Most scholars commonly follow the conclusions of J.G. de Casparis, derived from epigraphy, and J. Dumarcay, formulated on the basis of architectural style, that Lara Jonggrang was erected between AD 832 and 856 by a Sivaite noble, Rakai Pikatan, who ruled Central Java during this approximate period in partnership with a Buddhist consort. Dr. Jordaan prefers a founding date in the late eighth century, when the ruling central Javanese élite was strongly devoted to Mahayana Buddhism.

The conclusions of De Casparis and Dumargay, while not indisputable, have much circumstantial evidence to recommend them. Dumarcay's discussions regarding dating on the basis of architectural techniques are not recounted nor directly refuted here. Dumargay is described (p. 29, footnote 11) as misunderstanding Stutterheim's theory that differences between Indonesian and Indian classical versions of Indian materials (for instance, the Ramayana) were due to the influence of Indian folk traditions on Indonesia, and is quoted as claiming that 'the representation of the Rama story on the Prambanan temples "is not meant to illustrate the Indian text but a Javanese adaptation.” In fact Dumarçay probably developed this theory on his own. Evidence that 'folk versions' of Indian epics were known in Java is exiguous. Dumargay's emphasis on Javanese rather than Indian inspiration is more consonant with known data. The ideas of De Casparis on Javanese elements in Indonesian Buddhism parallel those of Dumargay, which are based on a different data set. 718 Book Reviews

Dr. Jordaan’s justification for preferring an earlier dating to that of Dumarçay and De Casparis is that [sJubsequent research [...] has shown that neither the rival theory nor the arguments about style cut much ice, and that both had best be abandoned (Jordaan 1993)' (p. 25). The 1993 source cited is in the IAS Newsletter, Until further explication of his reasons for disregarding De Casparis' and Dumarcay's interpretations of the data is available, most scholars will probably remain inclined to accept the later dating for the Lara Jonggrang complex.

Another major theme expounded in this work is that the construction of Lara Jonggrang was significantly aided, if not initiated, by Buddhist Sailendras. Two main lines of argument are adduced to support this theory. One concerns artistic motifs; the second is historically based.

In relation to the first argument, the author states that at Lara Jonggrang ‘many motifs and diverse figures were so lacking in Saiva spirit’ (p. 33). Most art historians feel that the Lara Jonggrang aesthetic is not significantly different from other central Javanese Hindu shrines, although the scale is much larger. For this suggestion to be true, one would have to argue that all other Central Javanese Hindu sites were also Sailendra-assisted or -influenced, a most unlikely proposition.

The author of this introduction and the present reviewer have crossed swords over this matter before. To give credit where credit is due, Dr. Jordaan chivalrously cites my review of his previous book, which questions some of his views, in his Introduction (‘Imagine Buddha in Prambanan; Reconsidering the Buddhist background of the Loro Jonggrang temple complex", Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 25 (1994):442-4). Nevertheless, I have not convinced him of the rightness of my views, nor has he convinced me of the superiority of his. One of our fundamental points of disagreement concerns the relationship between Buddhist and Hindu art in Central Java. It is undeniable that there is much similarity between the art of the Hindu complexes and that of their Buddhist rivals. The significance of and reasons for this parallelism, however, are major bones of contention between Dr. Jordaan and myself.

One of Dr. Jordaan's major arguments in this introduction, as in his previous book, is that the decoration of the Buddhist sanctuaries of Central Java bears so many resemblances to that of Lara Jonggrang that one must conclude that the Buddhists played a major role in Lara Jonggrang's design. In addition to the countervailing points made in my review of that volume, one can cite the recent publication by Daigoro Chihara, Hindu-Buddhist Architecture in Southeast Asia (Leiden: Brill, 1996). According to Dr. Chihara, although in India, Hindu and Buddhist art ‘initially evolved with opposing, tendencies’, Book Reviews 719

[t]he production of large numbers of divine images in Hinduism was influenced by changes in Buddhism as it evolved from Early Buddhism into Tantrism, while Hindu art can also be said to have exerted manifold influences on the making of images in Buddhism.

Furthermore, there are

both sculptural elements that clearly identify a temple as being either Hindu or Buddhist and also any other forms of decorative sculpture, and in the latter case there is a complete freedom of intellectual exchange between the two religions.

Motifs shared by the two religions are very numerous, including

kala, makara, kinnara, gandharva, garuda, hamsa, naga, apsara, gana, singha, as well as variegated composite designs combining these with animal, foliate and geometrical patterns [...] and itis difficult to discern here any reflection of the doctrinal differences between these two religions (p. 45).

In another recent article (Roy E. Jordaan and Robert Wessing, ‘Human sacrifice at Prambanan', BKI 152 (1996):45-73), Dr. Jordaan and his co-author are

inclined to question the validity of some current designations [such] as ‘Hinduism’ and ‘Buddhism’ and to wonder whether these terms do full justice to the ideas of the Javanese of the times [..] Both early Hinduism and Buddhism were flexible enough to accommodate and utilize each other's icons.

This formulation is more acceptable than the argument for Buddhist involvement in the construction of Lara Jonggrang.

Dr. Jordaan cites FD.K. Bosch to support the assertion that Lara Jonggrang has an ‘underlying Buddhist conception’. What the signs of this may be, however, is left unsaid. Is he referring to the mandala-like layout of Lara Jonggrang? Such plans, while identified in Java with Buddhist complexes (Sewu, Plaosan), are not found in Indian Buddhist architecture. The architectural mandala is probably Javanese, rather than Buddhist or Hindu. Dr. Jordaan's statement (p. 92) that ‘the overall architectural design of Prambanan, possibly comprising both Sewu and Loro Jonggrang, was conceived in Indian monasteries’, is difficult to accept. He gives much more credence to the possible role of Indians in Indonesian architecture than most contemporary scholars are prepared to allow.

This does not prohibit one from agreeing with Dr. Jordaan’s statement that ‘one would do well to pay more attention to reliefs that betray precisely nonJavanese influences’ (p. 103). This is a line of inquiry which should be followed. Obviously, the nature of the benefits to be derived from such a study would be very different, depending on the original assumptions which one holds; nevertheless such a question holds much merit, and one hopes that Dr. Jordaan will take it up. 720 Book Reviews

The names Sailendra and Sanjaya play key roles in early Indonesian history, but the precise nature of the kinship units denoted by these terms remains indistinct. They were designated in the inscriptions as wangsa, which can be generally glossed as ‘family’, but there are of course many different sorts of family structures in the world, and different ways of deciding, who belongs to which family. The Javanese family has never been easy to define, since the Javanese lack family names, and do not restrict descent rules to either the paternal or maternal line. Dr. Jordaan, like many other scholars including, Prof. De Casparis, has concluded that the Sailendra and Sanjaya were two separate families which espoused two different religions, Buddhism and Hinduism. He further states (p. 30) that the Sailendras were ‘expelled’ from Java in the early ninth century. Dr. Jordaan notes that the Hindu Sanjaya group is known to have contributed to several Buddhist religious sanctuaries. He reasons (for instance on p.41) that since Rakai Pikatan, a Hindu of the Sanjaya line, contributed to the expansion of Candi Plaosan, the Sailendra may have helped the Hindus to build Lara Jonggrang. This could only have been the case if Lara Jonggrang had been built before the Sailendra exodus. Dr. Jordaan's main evidence for the conclusion that the Sailendras contributed to Lara Jonggrang is that Lara Jonggrang's construction began according to his calculation during the Sailendra period (p. 43). This argument is both circular and in conflict with the dating of the site advocated by most other scholars.

In fact only one person, known as Balaputra, can be identified as a likely Sailendra exile. Although information is vague, one plausible interpretation of several lines of evidence is that Balaputra was a leader of a dissident Sailendra faction who led an unsuccesful revolt in Central Java. He later turns up as the ruler of Srivijaya in Sumatra. This is not proof that a large group left Java, however. A Buddhist queen identified by numerous inscriptions as the daughter of a Sailendra king continued to exercise influence in Central Java, and to sponsor Buddhist religious construction, most notably at Candi Plaosan.

Pikatan, not Daksa, is credited by most scholars as the probable founder of Lara Jonggrang. He seems to have been more concerned with unifying various groups in his kingdom, especially the Buddhists, and reconciling their differences, unlike the Buddhist Sailendras, who were more partisan where religion is concerned, Images of Manjusri Yamantaka, although not numerous, are known from Central Java. This figure portrays the bodhisattva Manjusri in a ferocious guise which he assumed to kill the Hindu god Siva, whom he subsequently restored to life. This was done in order to convert Siva to Buddhism. There is no evidence of a corresponding image of a Hindu slaying a Buddhist deity. Epigraphical evidence also provides several cases in which Hindus contributed to Buddhist monuments (Plaosan,

Kalasan, Daksa's Gatak inscription), but there is not a single inscription giving evidence of Buddhist sponsorship of a Hindu temple.

Finally, one may ask why, if Lara Jonggrang was built during Sailendra times, there are no other Hindu temples in southern Central Java dating from this period? The era from AD 780 to 832 is marked by a seemingly complete absence of Hindu construction. It would seem likely that if Lara Jonggrang, the largest Hindu complex of all, were built during this time, then smaller temples of that faith should also be numerous. Another problem which such a dating would pose is logistical: if Borobudur was also built during this period, as all authorities now believe, then how could enough workers and other resources have been found to create another vast complex simultaneously?

Another important aspect of Dr. Jordaan's study of Lara Jonggrang is his consideration of its imagery. He first considers and discards the theory that Javanese temples were royal mausolea. In place of this idea, he advances the idea that the temples were replicas of Mt. Meru. This inference is in tune with much other contemporary scholarship on Javanese temples. He then advances a new and original concept: that the main object of the whole Lara Jonggrang complex was to portray the churning of amrta, using Mt. Mandara as the churning stick.

An interesting subsidiary point, which this reviewer is inclined to accept, is Dr. Jordaan's argument that the monstrous faces over Javanese temple doors and niches for statuary may be found referred to in the Old Javanese Ramayana under the name suwuk. He quotes the following passage in support (p. 49):

These suwuk were beautifully carved out of gems and candrakanta stones. Their eyes were round, staring and protruding. He (the suwuk) was like Rahu, as it were, who also tried to steal the amrta.

But the Visa-Kalakuta (Siva's poison) caused the door suwuk to flee. For he was afraid of the god Sankara, the remover of Sin, who was always present in the temple.

Possibly we should give preference to the term suwuk to the word currently in use, kala, to designate these motifs. It is also possible, however, that the term actually refers to the dvarapala images of door guardians holding clubs, rather than to the monster heads on the walls.

Dr. Jordaan's main point here is that he, like Poerbatjaraka before him, believes that the Old Javanese Ramayana was describing a temple like Prambanan. He believes that we should therefore reinterpret much of Lara Jonggrang's design as part of a great effort to portray the churning of amrta. For him, this suggests that 'the central area (that is, the uppermost terrace of the complex upon which stand the Siva, Brahma, and Visnu shrines, among 722 Book Reviews

other structures] might have been designed and used as an artificial tank or pool’. He is ‘surprised’ that the uppermost terrace had only two drainage spouts, and implies that they would have been insufficient to drain away rainwater.

The degree to which the overall design of Lara Jonggrang was subordinated to a concept emphasizing the churning of amrta is debatable. At Angkor, where this theme was undeniably central to the plans of the designers, the concept is made unambiguous by such devices as the wide moats and balustrades with sculptures depicting the gods and asuras holding the serpent which was coiled around Mt. Mandara during the churning. At Lara Jonggrang such associated motifs are absent. In East Java, where amrta played a significant role in religious activity, the benefits of amrta are emphasized rather than its original creation. For the Javanese, amrta (or holy water) was constantly available, and constantly created in ceremonies designed for that purpose. The concrete symbolism of this activity focused on the containers for the water, the beakers and kundika, rather than on the abstract idea of the original churning of the ocean of milk in the primordial past. If a pool were constructed at the top of Lara Jonggrang, then no spouts at all would have been required. The logistical problems of getting water to the top of the complex, and the technical problem of keeping it from seeping away through the soil, are not easily dispelled.

The idea of Lara Jonggrang as, if not a mandala in the strict sense of the word, a complex with a design fundamentally influenced by concepts associated with mandala patterns, Dr. Jordaan dismisses along with the idea of the Hindu Javanese temple as a royal mausoleum. This does not however result in any satisfactory explanation of the peripil or foundation deposit boxes found in the ruins. Stutterheim had designated the contents of these boxes as ‘symbols of those divine principles which correspond with the different elements of the human body’, meant to give the deified ruler a ‘temporary body’ (quoted on p. 47). Even if we no longer take seriously the idea of the temple as a mausoleum, the existence of these deposits must still be accounted for in order to determine the overall symbolism of Lara Jonggrang. The recent work by A. Snodgrass on the Gharbadhatu and Vajradatu mandalas (The matrix and diamond world mandalas in Shingon Buddhism, New Delhi: SataPitaka Series, Indo-Asian Literatures 354, 1988) is basic to any endeavour to understand the function of these foundation deposits. Further students of this subject should acguaint themselves with his work before advancing new arguments on the significance of the central Javanese mandala-like complexes.

Although it does not play an important part in the work under review, the article by Roy E. Jordaan and Robert Wessing on ‘Human sacrifice at Book Reviews 723

Prambanan' represents another aspect of the author's perspective on Lara Jonggrang and merits brief consideration here. During the colonial period, a human skeleton was found beneath the ruins of the central complex of Lara Jonggrang, in a context which suggests that it was that of an ancient rather than a modern individual. The article suggests that the skeleton was that of a person intentionally sacrificed during the temple's construction. If verified, this finding would throw significant new light on ancient Javanese religion.

The authors advanced several other possible examples of human sacrifice in ancient Indonesia in support of their thesis that this is in fact what happened at Lara Jonggrang. These include four other sites where human skeletons have been found in association with Javanese ruins. In the other cases, the data available for reconstructing the contexts of these finds is less detailed than that for Lara Jonggrang. It is possible that these constitute Islamic-period burials, especially in the instance of Candi Sojiwan. Examples of such re-use of pre-Islamic sites for Muslim burial grounds are quite common in Java and are well-documented at Candi Tikus, Bajang Ratu, Wringin Lawang and Candi Ratna. The authors also cite, as ‘the only other example known to us of human sacrifice in Buddhism as practised in Indonesia’ (pp. 60-1), Heine-Geldern's study of the worship of the deity Heruka. The quote from Heine-Geldern supplied, however, does not give any concrete evidence that human sacrifice was ever conducted in conjunction with this god in Indonesia. Furthermore, Dr. Jordaan and Dr. Wessing want to challenge the accepted thirteenth-century dating for the site where the Heruka image was found, at Padang Lawas, North Sumatra (p. 61, footnote 13), claiming that only circumstantial evidence and circular reasoning were used to derive this date. In fact the dates for structures at Padang Lawas are mainly inferred from from epigraphy, Chinese ceramics and dated statuary.

Another line of argument pursued in support of the theory of human sacrifice at Lara Jonggrang is the Javanese culik (‘abduction’) rumor syndrome as discussed by RH. Barnes (Construction sacrifice, kidnapping and headhunting rumors on Flores and elsewhere in Indonesia’, Oceania 64 (1993):14658). Barnes seems interested in the reasons for the rumours; he does not seem to claim any basis in reality for them. It would be quite misleading to cite them as evidence for human sacrifice. J. G. de Casparis is criticized (p. 67) for not mentioning IJzerman’s discovery of the bones of dog, ant-eater and birds at Prambanan when discussing the possibility that meat might have been offered to raksasa as part of temple founding ceremony. But are these meats of the type which are likely to appease the hunger of spirits? Again, we just do not know. Any conclusions on this subject would be purely subjective.

The authors speculate (p. 68) that the human sacrifices were meant to animate the temple. But the inscriptions which desribe temple founding rituals, as well as the mandala ceremonies conducted today, are not concerned

with animating the temple, but rather with expelling evil from the premises. The animation of the shrine is performed by the descent of the spirit of the deity into the main icon in the central cella. Thus this explanation finds no support from established practice.

In conclusion, one can praise this book for two accomplishments: its excellent translations of basic works on the archaeology of Lara Jonggrang, a shrine which deserves much more attention than it has yet received, and its delineation of several lines of inquiry which might be profitably pursued. Although this reviewer regrets that he cannot agree with many of the suppositions proposed here to account for various aspects of the site's structure and significance, nevertheless this work is evidence of much original thought and represents a constructive contribution to the subject of early Javanese culture.