# Art’s call for aesthetic theory
by Eva Schürmann  
Published in: James Elkins (ed.): Art history versus Aesthetics.  
New York / London 2006.


The notorious gap between art historians and philosophers, which is evinced once again by the conversation documented in this volume, is not unlike the problem famously formulated by Kant: Conceptions without intuitions are empty and intuitions without conceptions are blind. Not that it would not be objectionable – as Kant perfectly well knew and went on to demonstrate in the Critique of Pure Reason – if there were such a thing as a pure conception without any kind of intuition, and vice versa. But however provisional or artificial the distinction between concepts and visual perceptions, thinking and seeing, might be, it nonetheless highlights differences in figure-ground-constellations, that is to say: in what in each discipline is prior and what is background. It makes a crucial difference if, on the one hand, one is chiefly concerned with forming concepts and elaborating critical definitions, or if, on the other hand, one’s basic enterprise is to look at particular works in order to find out as much as possible about their visual features. And even if an art historian temporarily refrains from notions such as form and style to focus on, say, the circumstances of a work’s production, he or she still stresses the singular art work. By contrast, it is telling that a philosopher can, under certain circumstances, work very well without opening the eyes to the concrete givenness of a specific work.

And yet it would be a simplification to say that art historians are mainly concerned with the particular – in the sense of uniqueness and singularity – since almost every exponent of the discipline is worried about what is generalizable in a single work, be it the social and historical context or the ascription to a broader artistic movement. Precisely with his considerations about ‘art-in-general’2, Thierry de Duve showed how very general an art historical approach to the particular became in case of modern art. An art historian without any systematic account of the role and function of art would be a mere philological researcher. There are very many ways of practicing art history and of dealing with an art work, but none of those ways contents itself with a simple description of what is to be seen there.

Although things lie differently with the philosophy of art – since important and influential theories indeed consisted in very abstract conceptual formulations, for instance those of Schelling or Schopenhauer – it would again be too easy to think of philosophy as exclusively directed toward the general and the universal. Philosophers are not merely subsuming the particular beneath a general heading when they scrutinize which general is the most suitable for grasping the sense of a singular. Even the generalistic attitudes of some contextualization theories – for instance Luhmann’s concept of art as a system or Bourdieu’s hypothesis about the normative impact society has on what is considered to be art – eventually entail important insights into a single artwork’s embeddedness in a greater configuration and thereby contribute to a better understanding of its connectedness. And as art historians cannot help to generalize philosophers inadvertently stumble onto art historical territory when they have to refer to individual works in order to explain their ideas.

So apparently those attributions do not lead very far.

But to stress an art historian’s talent for visual discernment and a philosopher’s gift for conceptual astuteness still helps to point out the different priorities and salient features of both disciplines in order to get an idea of the systematic reasons for differences and misunderstandings.
I suppose that most philosophers would find rather troubling the genetic and historical link Thierry de Duve draws between Paul McCarthy and Matthias Grünewald “via Bruce Nauman, back to Dada, and then even further, back to Courbet”3. They would be irritated not because it is Paul McCarthy or an issue of disgust (or because they would think that Matthias Grünewald is incomparatively stronger than McCarthy …) but because it is as incautious as it is bold to juggle with such strong philosophical-historical assumptions and to suggest such a far-reaching genetic continuity without justifying the implicit normative assertions at work in such an approach. That is not to say that such a thesis would not be interesting and worthwhile to argue within the context of art historical discussion, but for someone with both a different academic socialization and a strong claim for conceptual justification it is just not plausible.

On the other hand, it is not difficult to imagine that most art historians would be rather bored by philosopher’s exegetical worries about what Kant meant or by the – philosophically very important – difference between the general and the universal, because that difference would not be of any applicable relevance to their concerns.

Now, if this is so, then we could say: long live the difference! Both are right to concentrate on their own concerns. They just have different critical agendas and are dealing with incomparable issues and Hyman is quite right to recommend each to remain on their own patch4. We should then rather concentrate on developing an account of their incommensurability.

I suppose this would be true and sufficient, if there were not the matter of aesthetics as precisely the intersection and intertwining of questions crucial to both disciplines. Intersection does not mean that things are helplessly confused, but that a philosophical theory of art and an art historical account of art occupy, indeed, very much the same ground. They do so all the more since art itself became philosophical. Not only since Duchamp’s ready-mades but already with paintings that make their own mediality a subject of discussion (e.g. Turner, the Impressionists etc.) art started to ask philosophical questions that have to be reflected in terms of aesthetic theory. Duchamp’s bicycle wheel persistently asks: what distinguishes an artwork from a non-artwork? Jasper Johns’ painting raises the very intricate question: is it a flag or is it a painting? Magritte makes us nervous by incessantly questioning the difference between the medium and the mediated. And so does Josef Beuys by shifting the boundaries between art and life. Those questions became partly more important than the single work. This becoming-philosophical of art that Danto repeatedly pointed out – for instance when he described Warhol as a philosopher5 – is the reason why it would be absurd if art historians would content themselves with leaving aesthetics to philosophers.

For it is art itself that makes claims for aesthetic theory. With its development towards selfreflexivity, it calls for the approximation of art and philosophy. We need this discipline for art’s sake and we would be very wrong to resign ourselves to inherited disciplinary boundaries and differences. What Adorno appropriately called art’s dependency on commentary makes aesthetics an indispensable enterprise that requires skills philosophers and art historians can best provide together. Philosophy yields insights in what could serve as a common denominator of art’s great diversity, disclosing thereby the shared aesthetic ground for various research projects. Art history can render such insights more specific with regards to concrete instances by taking into consideration the historical origins, settings and circumstances of individual works. Only together can philosophical concepts, in their capacity to disclose previously unnoticed connections, and art historical approaches, in their historic considerations and visual perspicacity, ensure that we come closer to art’s salient features.

Aesthetics, not in the narrow sense of either Kant’s theory of aesthetic judgement or of any kind of ideologically overdetermined reading, but as an approach that seeks to develop theoretical distinctions while remaining devoted to what Jim Elkins emphasized as the irreducibly visual and ungeneralisably singular character of works of art.6 One has reason to think that it is precisely this irreducibility that can scarcely be conceptually determined and that is in itself something unknown, as Elkins pointed out. But then we are to understand how indeterminate and unknown it is. It is the work’s “incomprehensibility that needs to be comprehended”7 as Adorno said.

We could have learned from the Greeks the very notion of theoria as a form of intellectual vision. Likewise this is what some versions of phenomenology could have taught us. Then aesthetic theory is already based on concepts as well as on intuitions, that is to say, on their inseparability. For the antinomy of conceptions and intuitions is in itself a concept. Kant provided the insight into their very connectedness and mutual condition. And significantly this is as well an insight provided by art, as again Adorno rightly emphasized: „Art is no more concept than it is pure intuition, and it is precisely thereby that art protests against their separation“.8 It is art, thus, that urges us to collaborate in forging aesthetic conceptions that are not only not empty, but seeing.

The author lives and works at the department of philosophy at the University of Darmstadt, (Residenzschloß, G - 64283 Darmstadt, Tel: 0+49 (0)6151-16-5366, Schuermann@phil.tudarmstadt.de ) She has published a book on the art of James Turrell and the perception theory of Merleau-Ponty: Erscheinen und Wahrnehmen. Munich 2000. ISBN: 3-7705-3473-5

Eva Schürmann ist Professor for Philosophy at the University of Magdeburg. She studied Philosophy, Art history and Comparative Literature at the University of Bochum, in Paris and in Cambridge (U.K.) Master 1994 on Spinozas Ethics. Dissertation 1998 on Perception in Merleau-Ponty und James Turrell. In 2004 she was visiting professor at the university of Chicago. From 2009-2011 she was professor for aesthetics at the University of applied sciences Hamburg.

Recent publications: Sehen als Praxis. Suhrkamp 2008.

eva.schuermann@ovgu.de
