# "But They Don't Have Our Concept of Art"
by Denis Dutton

<!-- TOC START min:2 max:3 link:true update:false -->
  - [I](#i)
  - [II](#ii)
  - [III](#iii)
  - [IV](#iv)
  - [V](#v)

<!-- TOC END -->

## I

In the current discourse on cross-cultural aesthetics, an oft-repeated formula has it that understanding the art of another people may be difficult or impossible because "they have a concept of art different from ours," or "they don't have art in our sense." But what does "the concept of art" denote here? One way to approach this question is to ask what "concept of" adds to the claim that another culture has "a concept of art different from ours." If the claim were merely that they have "an art different from ours," there would be no issue. The added "concept of" seems to want to extend the claim, as though to say that despite outward appearances to the contrary, the meaning art has for these people differs radically from the meaning art has for us, that we may be mistaken even to call it "art." Similarly with the claim that their "sense" of "art" is different from ours.

Such claims represent a style of thinking that has deeply marked crosscultural aesthetics for the last generation. Whether the area of investigation is the artistic life of small-scale, non-literate societies (so-called tribal or ethnographic arts) or the arts of non-Western civilizations, such as India, the frequent contention is that the aesthetic forms of these cultures are wholly other, and cannot be understood in terms familiarly applied to the arts of the West. I shall turn to tribal cultures later, but I begin by considering an essay in the influential collection The Traffic in Culture, edited by George E. Marcus and Fred R. Myers. Lynn M. Hart writes about large decorative paintings on mythological themes made by Hindu women in Uttar Pradesh, sometimes individually, sometimes in groups together, which are part of the activity surrounding marriage celebrations. (Lynn M. Hart, "Three Walls: Regional Aesthetics and the International Art World," in The Traffic in Culture: Refiguring Art and Anthropology, ed. George E. Marcus and Fred R. Myers (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), 12750.) She describes the women artists in their working environment; then the appearance of one such painting in a North American dining room; thence to the exhibition of another of these jyonthi paintings in the Magiciens de la terre show in the Pompidou Center in Paris in 1989. Despite the fact-or perhaps because of it -that jyonthi paintings are straightforward, colorfully stylized depictions of Hindu mythological themes (Ganesh, Laksmi and Vishnu, sun and moon, lovebirds, etc.), Hart insists on using "producer" instead of "artist" and "visual image" instead of "art" to refer to this work (if it is "work"). Hart is determined, she explains, to avoid "inappropriate Western terminology." This is important, she thinks, because otherwise Westerners might have trouble appreciating that "the images and patterns themselves are based on religion, ritual, and mythic themes and derive their meaning-and their power- from the religious contexts of their production and use." The indigenous aesthetic principles of this art, or visual image production, are "different from standard Western aesthetics." The excellence of the works from an indigenous perspective, she explains, "is seen to lie in the closeness of the central symbol's approximation to an ideal image, with special attention paid to the style, technique, and materials used. It is important to re-present the symbols used in an adequate way; not to improve upon them, though at the same time the image on the wall should be as beautiful and pleasing as possible" -and so on, all "quite distinct from Western aesthetic canons" (131).

In point of fact, there is nothing in Hart's descriptions that is distinct from Western canons and concepts of art, which variously include in many Western genres and historic epochs the colorful approximation of images from religious mythology, produced with attention to style, technique, and materials. The conservatism of jyonthi painting, its prohibition on "improving" on the traditional iconography, may not characterize the Western avant-garde, but it is a feature found through much of the history of European art in the Middle Ages, as well as traditional religious folk arts and women's arts of Europe for the three centuries prior to the present one. The theology might be different, but there's not one thing Hart describes that can't be found in "Western aesthetics." This last point is worth dwelling on, for it seems to me that often when it is said that some other culture has a "different concept of art" from ours, there is implicit in the claim an extremely circumscribed and historically specific definition of the art denoted as "ours." Hart has made no effort to probe the history and traditions of "our" art to see if analogues or similarities might exist for the Uttar Pradesh example.

Hart's claim that jyonthi painting cannot be understood by applying to it categories or concepts of Western art is in the end either trivial or false.
If the claim means that Western painting does not traditionally include elements of Hindu mythology, is not painted on whitewashed mud walls by fluent speakers of Hindi as part of the celebration of marriage rites, then indeed, jyonthi painting is quite beyond Western categories. But Hart wants more than that; she would have us believe that jyonthi painting is not art "in our sense," a claim which is demonstrably false. At one desperate point she attempts to dramatize the cultural difference between jyonthi image producers and European artists:

>The Western producer of a painting destined (he or she hopes) for the wall of an art gallery and possibly for the wall of a great art museum is conscious of him- or herself as "artist" making an object that is contrived, posed, set apart from everyday life, just as the short stories and novels of contemporary fiction are contrived, posed, and separate from everyday life. These products proclaim, "Look at me, I'm art!" The producer of the ritual images in a Hindu village is not conscious of herself in this particular way. She is producing an image that derives its meaning from the part it plays in life, rather than as a contrived, posed object. (xx)

While I would challenge the adequacy, indeed the competence, of this as a description of Western art, it is at least clear that Hart is comparing two very different categories of activity. On the one hand, the ambitious Western artist operating in a professional market of agents, dealer galleries, and museums; against this familiar image she pits Indian women who decorate the walls of their houses with conventionalized religious designs as part of making a special occasion of a wedding. Hart says that beyond the careful, conscious use of aesthetic judgment in producing the paintings, there is a further human dimension absent from the Western point of comparison: "A woman, a mother, lovingly creates beautiful, emotion-filled, auspicious, important images for her own children for the purpose of helping them, of supporting them so they can succeed and be happy in the next stage of their lives."

Hart has chosen a false comparison. In fact, the history of the West is replete with countless mothers and prospective mothers-in-law who have labored at embroidery, knitting, and sewing, "producing" beautiful artifacts for their children's weddings, either as part of a trousseau or as decorative elements (e.g., decorated cakes) for the wedding day. These beautiful-or beautified can be as lovingly created by European as by Indian women. Much of this output is cloth or fiber art, but it also would include decorated ceramics and items of household furniture. Some of these objects would embody religious themes. Why has Hart failed to mention comparable Western traditions of dowry or trousseau arts to place in relation to the ;yonthi paintings of Uttar Pradesh? It is because she is guilty of the very ethnocentrism she accuses others of. She studies a genre of folk art in one culture and, seeing that it is a type of painting, looks within Western culture to discover an analogue. Her mistake is to imagine that the comparison will be painting in Western culture. But if you want a comparison for a jyonthi painting, it is absurd to look at, say, a Diebenkorn hanging in a Western gallery. Jyonthi paintings belong with domestic and dowry arts of cultures worldwide, from beautifully woven Maori feather cloaks for infants to embroidered samplers to knitted blankets and painted cradles in European folk traditions. Elsewhere in her essay, Hart complains of the West's tendency to place a greater value on High Art traditions than on craft traditions. In fact, Hart does exactly that herself: she is so impressed by these Indian forms as painting that she fails to acknowledge the women's craft traditions associated with marriage celebrations and trousseaus in her own culture. They too can involve the loving and devoted exercise of skill and aesthetic judgment, and produce objects to help celebrate auspicious occasions and contribute to the success of the next generation.

## II

Hart's analysis is an example of a widespread tendency to try to exaggerate cultural difference far beyond reality, to try to make a foreign art formseem more alien than it actually is. In her case the strategy entails taking what should seem to us a familiar art form and estranging it by finding an inappropriate practice in our own culture with which to compare it. Here is another strategy for achieving a similar end: to describe an art form strictly in terms of one of its aspects, omitting to mention features which would render it comprehensible to a Western audience, and from this drawing large conclusions about non-Western or tribal arts. In an essay entitled "The Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of Technology," Alfred Gell defends a general thesis about ethnographic arts in terms of the analysis of a single example, Trobriand Island canoe decoration. (Alfred Gell, "The Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of Technology," in Anthropology, Art, and Aesthetics, ed. Jeremy Coote and Anthony Shelton (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992), 40-63.)

Gell begins by noting anthropology's general lack of regard for art, but he says this should be expected: social anthropology ought by its very nature to be anti-art. The aesthetic awe afforded by objects in the Museum of Mankind demonstrates what "is an unredeemably ethnocentric attitude, however laudable in other respects." Gell argues that the anthropological study of art should be carried out under the assumption of a "methodological philistinism," analogous to the "methodological atheism" required of the study of religion. "I would suggest that the study of aesthetics is to the domain of art as the study of theology is to the domain of religion." Just as anthropologists of religion must set aside their religious predilections, so anthropologists of art must ignore the aesthetic attractiveness of the objects and practices they study -the anthropology of art requires "a complete break with aesthetics" (42). With this in mind, Gell invites us to consider the arts as components of "a vast and often unrecognized technical system, essential to the reproduction of human societies. . . ." He proposes that art be thus understood as a "technology of enchantment," where enchantment is seen not as peculiar only to art, but as a potentiality "immanent in all kinds of technical activity."

This potentiality is essentially magical, and Gell uses as his central example the stunning prow configurations of Trobriand Island canoes that are used for Kula expeditions. With their bright red and white paint and intricate carving sometimes resembling a mushroom, or recalling the scroll-like appendages of an Ionic capital, the prows are designed to dazzle and disorient the spectator, giving a possible trading advantage to the party which arrives in such a decorated canoe. So much is uncontroversial; one thinks of not only the psychological warfare of Kula transactions, but combat equipment, such as the fighting shields of Sepik and Highlands warriors of New Guinea, which often display horrific faces designed to frighten an enemy. It is not the bold effect of such work that impresses Gell, however.
Instead, he emphasizes what he calls "the halo effect of technical difficulty" in Trobriand art. As a child, Gell tells us, he was deeply impressed by a matchstick model of Salisbury Cathedral: "from a small boy's point of view it was the ultimate work of art, much more entrancing in fact than the cathedral itself. . . ." He draws from this a very large conclusion about the reaction of all of us to works of art: "I am impressed by works of art in the extent to which I have difficulty . . . in mentally encompassing their coming-into-being as objects in the world accessible to me by a technical process which, since it transcends my understanding, I am forced to construe as magical" (49). Works of art become objects of mystery and fascination by virtue of their incomprehensibility as technical feats.

Gell attempts to reinforce this view by referring to J. F. Peto's 1894 trompe-l'oeil painting popularly known as Old Scraps, a highly realistic still life of letters, paper scraps, drawing pins, and faded ribbons tacked to old board. The fascination of this work, he claims, is that its audience cannot comprehend how mere paint could be used to create such a realistic representation. This "technical magic" gives the painting its prestige and value (a value no similar photograph could attain). Moreover, the meaning of Old Scraps in our aesthetic lives has analogies in the art of small-scale traditional societies. In the case of a Trobriand canoe splashboard, "it is very difficult to acquire the art of transforming the root-buttress of an ironwood tree, using the rather limited tools which the Trobrianders have at their disposal, into such a smooth and finished product" (54).

Magic is the ideal technology of such societies as the Trobrianders'; it enables one to accomplish a task instantly and effortlessly -rather than with uncertainty and effort. Art also exhibits technological mastery; hence Gell argues that there is a "convergence" between the aims of ordinary technology, magic, and art-the last two being enchanted versions of the first.
Like conjurers, artists w ho defy ordinary technical understanding are given the ambiguous status of being "half-technician and half-mystagogue." While this puts artists at a disadvantage in modern market societies, Gell claims, it gives them a special status in traditional societies such as the Trobriands'. Gell concludes with a description of Trobriand horticultural magic. The Trobriand garden is "a system of technical knowledge and at the same time a work of art, which produces yams by magic." The technology of enchantment is manifest in garden layout and poetry: "Just as when, confronted with some masterpiece, we are fascinated because we are essentially at a loss to explain how such an object comes to exist in the world, the litanies of the garden magician express the fascination of the Trobrianders with the efficacy of their actual technology which, converging towards the magical ideal, adumbrates this ideal in the real world" (62).

There is no doubt Gell's argument throws light on how some forms of ethnographic art might profitably be understood. However, the connecting of art with magic is plausible only so long as he attends to the general awe felt by audiences; but to appropriate in general the logic of artistic tech> nique to magical technology is wrong. Considering Western art alone, the claim does not stand up. While there are many works of art which fascinate audiences as technical display (Peto's painting is a perfect example), and while technique is for many people virtually the only criterion for artistic value (hence the familiar abuse of modernism: "My kid could do that!"), technical excellence is not the main reason most European audiences are interested in art. At the present time the most popular art period, judged by print and art book sales and exhibition attendances, is French Impressionism, which is not a historical school particularly marked by technical display. Gell mentions that Rembrandt is admired for technical skill, but so are many other seventeenth-century painters who are rated much lower as artists.

That even Gell is uncomfortable with this position is indicated by his strained attempts to expand his conception of technique to include Picasso's bronze baboon whose head is a toy car (1955), and even Duchamp's Fountain (1917). This strategy only compounds Gell's error: Baboon and Young is a humorous but technically uninteresting piece, while Fountain is in part a direct attack on the very idea of technique in art. The point of Duchamp's readymades is that they are ordinary objects to which the artist does nothing except to present them in a gallery. If Gell can include this particular piece of plumbing in the class of technically accomplished works, then he has expanded the definition of "technique" to encompass witty or original gestures which involve no making-skill on the part of the artist. This is not a load the term can intelligibly carry; Fountain is a famous work, but not because it exhibits extraordinary technique. Rather, it purports to show that it is possible for an object to be a work of art while demonstrating no technique whatsoever. The inclusion of Picasso and Duchamp here is not a minor confusion on Gell's part, but in fact undermines his whole effort to show that admiration for technical mastery-and with it a sense of magic and enchantment-is the central component of the aesthetic response.

Turning specifically to ethnographic arts, we encounter further uncertainties. Technical skill is perhaps more obviously admired in, say, Oceanic art traditions than in many European modernist exercises, but not always. Virtuoso carving, such as is seen on Trobriand splashboards, fits Gell's case very well, as would much Maori and Polynesian carving. But consider Sepik: in northern New Guinea wild expressiveness, rather than elaborate finish or virtuoso facility, is frequently the criterion of aesthetic excellence and cultural power. The same could be said of New Guinea Highlands shields, which are powerful as works of art through bold visual impact rather than noticeable technical accomplishment.

Moreover, while some cultures treat artists as a virtual priestly class, as possessors of special magical /aesthetic knowledge, others do not. This suggests another consideration contrary to Gell. He stresses that we are amazed, wondering of the artwork, "How was it done?" True indeed, especially with well-developed European technical traditions: as a sometime pianist, I have trouble conceiving what it takes to perform Liszt's Transcendental Etudes the way Georgy Cziffra does, and realistic painting in the style of J. F. Peto is impressive in a similar manner. But many small-scale traditional societies, lacking either the vast population or the extreme specialization of art-technical labor that makes possible the emergence of the likes of Cziffra or Peto, treat the artist not as a master of a kind of technical magic, but as a trained craftsman performing tasks anyone could learn.
In the end, despite his universalizing ambitions, Gell fails to establish an acceptable way of looking across the whole range of art in traditional societies, falling into a kind of Trobriand localism.

## III

I turn next to Susan M. Vogel, whose writing on tribal arts displays an eloquence and intellectual sophistication considerably exceeding that of the previous authors. Yet in her wonderful book Baule: African Art, Western Eyes, she begins with statements reflecting a point of view similar to theirs:

>This book is inspired by my enjoyment of certain objects of Baule material culture as works of art in a Western sense, but it seeks to explore what "artworks" mean in Baule thinking and in individual Baule lives. For almost a century, Baule art has been recognized in Europe (and later in America) as one of Africa's most significant sculpture traditions. Although Baule art is important in the Western view of African art, the people who made and used these objects do not conceive them as "art," and may equate even the finest sculptures with mundane things, devoid of any visual interest, that have the same function and meaning. . . . "Art" in our sense does not exist in Baule villages, or if it does villagers might point to modern house decorations, rather than famous traditional sculptures still made and used in villages and evoked by the term "African art." (Susan Mullin Vogel, Baule: African Art, Western Eyes (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997).)

Her support for this contention includes the following observations, among others. First, the Baule will "merge and equate" (a) spirits and unseen powers, (b) ordinary physical objects in which they dwell, such as a lump of clay, and (c) superb sculptures which they may also inhabit. However, only the last are works of art in the Western sense. Second, the Baule "attribute great powers to their artworks -powers that Western culture would mainly relegate to the realm of superstition. . . . Enormous powers of life and death are integral parts of the sculptures we admire in museums, and Baule people do not consider them apart from those powers." Third, and especially emphasized by Vogel, many of the most important artworks of the Baule are not meant to be seen by large audiences, or by just anybody, but are normally hidden from view, "kept in shuttered or windowless rooms that few people enter" or wrapped in cloth and taken out only infrequently. This sharply contrasts with the Western ethos of aesthetic objects which invite "intense, exalted looking" from a large audience (83). Looking itself is for the Baule a privileged and risky act, as the very sight of a sculpture can be fatal for the wrong person. This in turn has to do with the special place held by sight in Baule culture, where "seeing something is potentially more significant, more dangerous and contaminating, than touching or ingesting something" (110). (Thus, Vogel says, a woman inadvertently seeing a sacred men's mask might die from the event, whereas a blind woman who laid her hand on it but didn't realize what she was touching would not necessarily be so threatened; men might find the sight of a woman's genitals fatal.)

Do such considerations as these support the view that the Baule have a different conception of art from the West, that "art" in our sense cannot be found in Baule villages? No, they do not, as Vogel's subsequent account makes abundantly, repeatedly clear. She begins her account by describing masks and figure sculptures that have profound spiritual and intense personal significance to the Baule. These include personal portrait masks and so-called spirit spouses. Among those pieces, spiritual, magical, or personal aspects certainly loom larger in the minds of their owners than their aesthetic qualities, a fact which Western observers must take into account. But the relationship of an art genre to a spiritual world is a consideration that applies to the arts of Western culture as well. Thus a majority of believers whose religious sentiments were inspired by Giotto's frescos at Padua might have been just as moved by similar frescos which did not approach Giotto's artistry; in other words, the original audience might have possessed little or no appreciation of the comparative artistic value, let alone historical importance, of Giotto's frescos, and would have been responding to them as religious narratives. Part of understanding the cultural importance of Giotto for his original audience and its local descendants is grasping the place of his work in a specific economy of religious thought, and religion, though often intermingled with art, need not be confused with it. That acknowledged, it is perfectly valid for an art historian to discuss the aspects of Giotto's work which form part of art history -technique, formal excellence, modes of representation-rather than religious or social history. Nor are the aesthetic qualities of Giotto's paintings and frescos accidental by-products of religion, however closely tied to religion that art may be. Their status as works of art is not threatened by their having been treated by most of their audience as mere biblical illustrations, or as colorful backdrops, barely to be noticed, for religious ceremonies.

But even taking into account the privacy and magical properties of Baule spirit carvings-or at least many of the ones most prized by Europeansthey are nevertheless subject by the Baule themselves to the same kinds of aesthetic characterizations applied to art carvings elsewhere. In fact, aesthetic appreciation of Baule carving is, Vogel admits, one of the points of agreement between Baule people and Western connoisseurs: "Baule artists, and the individual owners of objects, certainly sometimes enjoy the beauty of these objects and the skill it took to produce them" (29). Following Herbert Cole, Vogel says that Baule language points away from the "thingness" of art as noun, and emphasizes adverbial forms applied to carvings elegantly made to enhance, embellish, or empower in experience. The noun ish sense of the English notion of "art" is not entirely appropriate in the Baule context, where adjectives and adverbs relevant to artistic experience are used as modifiers attached to personal life, moral and physical struggles, and, Vogel says, "the drabness of daily existence" (292). Nevertheless, Baule will refer to outstanding sculptures in Baule equivalents of sweet, pleasing, beautiful, and good. A common phrase is to praise something or someone as "beautiful as a statue" the English "pretty as a picture." Conversely, English has no hesitation to apply aesthetic modifiers to nonmaterial objects of appreciation: dances and musical performances, for example. Nor can a vast cultural gap be made of the fact that some of the spirit carvings are neither well nor often seen. As Vogel acknowledges in a note, "many works of European art (ceiling frescoes, books of hours, hinged altarpieces) and numerous objects from other traditions (Japanese netsuke, Egyptian and other tomb furnishings, Chinese scrolls, Russian icons) were created in the full knowledge that they would be seen in low light, partially or at a distance, or only rarely, or privately by only a few people."

Moreover, beyond the personal and highly charged artworks which dominate the first half of Vogel's book, Vogel explains in a separate chapter that the Baule have a voluminous, purely secular decorative art. This includes doors, gold weights, stools, fans, combs, gong mallets, beautifully carved weaver's pulleys, and other decorated utilitarian objects. Because these sculpted artifacts are sold on their visual appeal, rather than being privately commissioned and kept out of view, they are very often of better technical quality than the more deeply important spiritual carvings. Their aesthetic quality also serves to advertise the skill of their makers, many of whom specialize in specific kinds of domestic object, such as ointment pots. Although increasingly replaced by machine-made objects today, they were, Vogel explains, "once very common, satisfying the basic desire for a pleasing, aestheticized environment" (270).

Through much of her discussion, Vogel is attempting to defamiliarize Baule art in the minds of her Western readers-requiring them to stop and think about the presuppositions they may bring to any appearance of the word "art" -in order that they might see the Baule objects as the magical and spiritual objects they are in the minds of many Baule people. In itself, this demand for a certain kind of "unlearning" of cultural habits is entirely laudable: it vastly extends the Western reader's understanding and appreciation-and, by the way, it is a strategy that could with profit be more often apphed to Giotto as well. But it is a strategy that can encourage the false notion that the Baule do not have works of art and that we are ethnocentrically mistaken in calling their works "art." In fact, Vogel does not believe this herself, which is why, having tried to establish the strangeness of the Baule approach to art, she turns around near the end of her book to assure readers of its familiarity: "Nothing described in this book is completely unique to the Baule. In fact, the greatest interest of a tightly focused art study like this one may lie precisely in how much light it can shed on the place of art in other, distant cultures."

## IV

How much different from a familiar practice in our culture must an alien practice, x, be in order to merit the designation, "They have a different concept of x from ours"? There is one extreme answer to this question, held earnestly and systematically to my knowledge by no ethnographers, though it is often hinted at or suggested informally: it is that version of cultural relativism (sometimes called contextualism) which claims that since the meaning of any concept is constituted by the other concepts and cultural forms in which itis embedded, concepts can never be inteligbly compared cross cultural. As every cultural system/context is diferent from every other, it follows therefore that any item within a system is strietl incomparable to any item i another system. Although counter to ordinary ross cultural experience, the kind of thinking suggested by his incommmensurabilty thesis rhetorc of cultural uniqueness-isattacive to some ethnographers who have specialized in specifi cultures it affords them a privileged standpoint, as they alone possess superior knowledge of the conceptual world of "their" wibe. The cultural interpretations of an ethnographer who knows the local language of a tribe, and has a gasp of the tribe's web of rarified or esoteric meaning, cannor casly be challenged or erieized by outsiders. And since no concept in any culture could embody exactly the meaning of any concept in any other culture, it follows that th translation of not only poetic language, bt any lnguage-along with comparison of politcal forms or social strictures, judicial sructures, cooking and eating practices, warfare, and especialy works of art-would therefore be impossible.

In the actual realm of day-to-day ethnography, where comparison and the cross-cultural application of concepts are constantly practiced, such incommensurability is never actually advocated or viewed as given fact.
Nevertheless, ethnographers will occasionally claim that a tribe "does not have our concept" of some practice or other. It is my contention that the notion of "a different concept" is stretched beyond intelligibility in most such contexts, and I have yet to see it used validly in connection with art.
In the first place, the claim that a cultural form is unique, or that the concept which denotes it in our culture is useless or inapplicable in another culture, requires that the person making the claim have a firm command of the potentially comparable practices or meanings in Western culture with which the alien meaning might be analogized. This is not a purely theoretical issue, for it suggests a practical line of interrogation which ought to be applied to any ethnographer claiming cultural uniqueness for an alien meaning: Are you confident you know enough about your own culture to make an incomparability claim? This problem is at the core of the essay by Hart: through either ignorance or oversight, she fails to find the proper comparison for jyonthi painting, which is not European High Art gallery painting, but traditional religious folk painting practiced in the context of trousseau arts. Broadly speaking, this is a general deficiency of the anthropology of art. Too often, it has transpired that young anthropologists, possessing limited familiarity with the vast range of arts of Western history, perhaps on their first overseas, let alone ethnographic, experience, set out to explain the subtle and intricate arts of remote tribal cultures. Some anthropologists may achieve descriptive accuracy and aesthetic insight in such an ethnographic exercise; many, however, are simply inadequate to the job.

With the Trobriand and Baule examples presented by Gell and Vogel, on the other hand, the issue is different. The magical powers associated with these arts do not commonly find a literal analogue in contemporary Western art practice (though they remind me in some respects of weeping or healing religious statues that periodically appear even today in Europe and the Americas, or outposts of Christianity, such as the Philippines). Nevertheless, we have no trouble appreciating the carving skill and aesthetic characteristics of Trobriand splashboards and Baule spirit spouse sculptures; we can also understand magical technologies (and economic objectives) as described by Gell as well as comprehend, thanks to Vogel, the psychological utility of the notion of the spirit spouse for the Baule. Combining our general ideas of art-even our nounish concept of a work of art or artsculpture-with these other aspects of a foreign artistic/magical/religious practice is hardly an insurmountable task for the Western intellectual imagination. Vogel in particular paints a lucidly coherent picture of the world of Baule belief and art. Understanding what she says does not require even the slightest stretching or adjustment of "our concept" of art, however much she extends the category of objects we call art.

Consider by way of comparison another human practice, cooking. Suppose there existed a tribe whose only way of cooking food-any food, ever- was to boil it in water. Everything this people ever prepared and ate was either raw, unheated in any manner, or boiled. Would we say, "They have a different concept of cooking from us"? No; they cook food, though within a more limited repertoire of techniques than ours. But a greater range of techniques to carry out a practice does not in itself change the concept of that practice. The invention of the microwave oven did not change the concept of cooking; it provided a new way to do it. Our grandparents had our concept of cooking, even if they cooked different food and never used microwave ovens. Suppose, however, that we discovered a tribe that never heated food, had never heard of heating it, but always passed a spirit wand over it before eating it. Would we say they had "a different concept of cooking from ours"? Again, no; whatever else they are doing- blessing food, sanctifying it, warding off poisons, authorizing the occasion of its being eaten-they are not cooking it with a spirit wand (although the wand could act to "cook" symbolically if they already knew what cooking was; but the tribe would have to have the concept of cooking for that).

In parallel fashion, suppose some culture's concept of art included objects which, although sculpted out of wood, were xever looked at with amazement, pleasure, or fascination of any kind, in public or in private (or were expected to be looked at even by nonhuman entities, as by gods), were the subject of no critical vocabulary whatsoever, did not represent anything mimetically, were crafted in no discernibly regular style, and although employed as doorstops, were never accorded any attention beyond what was required to place them before open doors or to remove them in order to shut doors. Could we say that this tribe "has a different concept of art from ours"? No; on the evidence so far supplied, whatever else these objects are (doorstops, evidently), they are not "art in a sense different from the Western sense." They are not works of art at all. In order to qualify as works of art, in whatever attenuated, distant, strange, or obscure sense we might want to capture, the objects would have to share in some of those aspects -sensuous pleasure in experience, created in (or against) a traditional style, involving intense imaginative attention, skillfully made or performed, being symbolic or representative, expressing emotion or feeling, and so forth-that art shares not only in Western culture, but in the great art traditions of Asia and the rest of the world, including tribal cultures of Africa, the Americas, and Oceania. If there is no discernible connection with this established complex of ideas, it is not a new kind of art form; it is rather a category of object or practice distinct from art.

Art is not a technical concept (like "endorsing a check") confined to one culture-ours-and by either patronizing generosity or imperialist ambition extended to others. From a cross-cultural, transhistorical perspective, art is a vast assemblage of related practices-most probably ephemeral, some resulting in material objects, or recorded as texts-which can be connected in terms of analogues and homologies between all known human societies. The similarities and analogies are not difficult to see in comparing one culture with another, and in fact the anthropological literature leaves no doubt that all cultures have some form of art in a perfectly intelligible Western sense of the term. As Francis Sparshott says, the word "art" gestures vaguely "toward an immense, indeterminate, and disparate body of practice and theory with a dense and much-studied history." (Francis E. Sparshott, "Art and Anthropology," Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 55 (1997): 239.)

## V

I note Sparshott's remark from its appearance in an essay by David Novitz, in which Novitz interprets Sparshott as wanting to emphasize the extent to which the concept of art is constructed differently by different cultures. (David Novitz, "Art by Another Name," British Journal of Aesthetics 38 (1998): 19-32. Our decisions about what is and is not art, Novitz argues, do not derive from some "essential nature of art but from certain historical and social contingencies." Such identifications on our part would not be "straightforward" or "undemanding," but would require that we understand "the history and theory that pervades a tribal culture" (24). As works of art are "cultural, rather than natural kinds," the identification of something as a work of art presupposes cultural knowledge, rather than the noting of mere similarities (Novitz remarks on what a mistake it would be to classify Baule spirit spouses as "art" because they resemble Cubist sculpture). Novitz insists that

>there is no one way that an artifact must be in order to be a work of art; there are shades, degrees, nuances, and subtleties bred of social life, all of which defy straightforward empirical investigation and so cannot be captured in precise formulations and rigorous definitions; still less by appeal to artistic laws or aesthetic universals. Rather, the decision to treat an artifact as a work of art is made in terms of criteria that have much to do with the historically-shaped life of a society; criteria that are of significance only because of their social location-the beliefs, preferences, values, and social arrangements that prevail within a society at a given time, and which make these features (rather than those) a mark of arthood. (26)

It follows for Novitz that we could not identify a work of art as such without first identifying it as belonging to a culture. As for such objects as the twin surrogate carvings of the Yoruba, they are "difficult to identify as works of art in the prevailing sense of the term," while "it would be at best misleading, at worst inaccurate" to describe Baule spirit spouse carvings as works of art "in any full-blooded sense of the term"; they are not "works of art in our sense of this word."

What, however, is "our" sense of the word "art"? Novitz does not say precisely, though his Western examples-standard paintings and sculptures, Van Eyck, Picasso, Michelangelo that for him at least the Western sense of "art," at least insofar as it pertains to visual artifacts, refers primarily to conventional museum works. This feeling is reinforced by his passing denial that in our culture banknotes, vintage cars, and postage stamps are works of art. At one point he discusses how we might know "whether a tribal artifact is art in our sense of this word," and then adds, "that is, in the only sense of the word we understand." This strikes me as a very odd remark. Even if we accept that our sense of the English word art is the only sense we understand, what does that come to? My sense of art, the sense I imagine is shared by most educated contemporary speakers of modern European languages (and certainly not only Europeans), does not refer exclusively to European art, but to all things in human history to which the term might reasonably refer, including art objects and artistic activities of non-Western cultures and distant historical times-objects, practices, and performances I've not experienced yet, but will someday. Similarly, we would intend that our concept of language does not refer to our language alone-for example, English -but to all languages, regardless of whether we can speak them, know what they are called, or even yet know they exist. (This is so even if the first thing we might think of as an example of a language is our own language; asked to imagine a bird, I might well think first of a sparrow or a robin, but still realize that penguins, kiwis, dodos, condors, and ruby-throated hummingbirds are birds as well.) The "only sense of 'art' we understand" cannot be a sense that refers only to art we already know. Art, in European thinking in any event, is an open concept, and like the concepts of religion, government, or sport, art stands ready to cover new instances and incarnations.

In a famous remark in Art, Clive Bell says that "either all works of visual art have some common quality, or when we speak of 'works of art' we gibber." (Clive Bell, Art (1913; New York: Capricorn, 1958), 17.) He meant, of course, that they have in common more than being referred to by the same word-there must be a some deep reason why that word is applied to such apparently different objects. This fundamental truth, as Bell realized, has at least as much pertinence in the discourse of cross-cultural aesthetics as it has for disputes about visual art within Bell's (and our) culture. I have the impression many of the theorists who have written of "art in our sense" suppose the meaning of the term is a function of its class of referents; even if they might deny it as a bald assertion, they write implicitly as though "our sense" of the term is governed by "our" referents, "the only ones we know." The two problems suggested by this are, first, that if our sense of "art" were determined by its referents, that sense would therefore be constantly changing, as it is extended daily to refer to objects and performances offered both from within our culture and from beyond it. But, second, how would we even known when to extend the application of "art," if we didn't have some principle of application which validates bringing new objects and performances under it?
There must be stable elements in its meaning; to deny this entails that we go about arbitrarily calling anything art.

Although he does not provide a full-blooded definition of art to accompany his mention of the "full-blooded sense of the term," David Novitz does hint at the existence of at least one fundamental criterion for art, basing his view on a suggestive remark by Monroe Beardsley: "in creating works of art we humanize the earth as we can in no other way, we warm it for ourselves, make a place where we belong. . . ." This has a nice, almost Heideggerian ring to it, but as Novitz notes, it does not tell us very much, and in any event it invites the refutation that some paradigmatic art makes its audience feel rather more alienated than at home on the humanized earth. I interpret Beardsley's statement as pointing vaguely toward the rather un-Beardsleyean notion of art as the affirmation of cultural identity.
This construal would be consistent with the emphasis Novitz places on culturally constructed ways in which art affects us: "If the capacity of an artifact to enrich particular lives is not merely incidental to it but derives from its form and content, and if the artifact can be seen to instantiate the values that people live by, so that it somehow legitimates their existence and enhances their sense of who and what they are, and if, furthermore, the artifact is valued for this sort of complex reason, we would, given the present moral ethos in which we live, be inclined to endorse the claim (should it be made) that it is a work of art" (25, italics added). Novitz is clearly right about many art objects and the activities associated with them, viewed cross-culturally: they enrich lives and amplify a sense of personal and cultural identity. But many objects and activities which are not art by Novitz's own description-collecting the stamps of one's homeland, perhaps, or tooling about the countryside in one's vintage car-accomplish the same goal nonartistically. Novitz distinguishes art identity-building from nonart identity-building with his qualification that the identity-building capacity of art should derive from its "form and content," rather than content alone. Here he invokes a familiar and quite traditional Western criterion for art: that art's value derives from the fusion of form and content, rather than from content (mere information or practical communication) alone.
Yet over all, it seems to me that despite the fact that "the present moral ethos" of contemporary multicultural society may stress the enhancement of a sense of "who and what we are" as an important function for art, there is vastly more going on in the production and enjoyment of art crossculturally than is even suggested, let alone captured, by such a formulation.

Noel Carroll has remarked on the way that art theories, despite claims to universality, are often rooted in aesthetic issues and debates of their own times. Thus, Carroll says, the theories of Clive Bell and R. G. Collingwood "are defenses of emerging avant-garde practices-neoim pressionism, on the one hand, and the modernist poetics of Joyce, Stein, and Eliot on the other." (Noel Carroll, "Identifying Art," in Institutions of Art: Reconsiderations of George Dickie's Philosophy, ed. Robert J. Yanal (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994), 15.)  Susanne Langer can be read as providing a justification for modern dance, while the initial version of George Dickie's institutional theory "requires something like the presupposition that Dada is a central form of artistic practice" in order to gain intuitive appeal. Arthur Danto's near-obsessional theorizing about indiscernible art/nonart objects, such as Warhol and supermarket Brillo boxes, derives from a special, and recent, theoretical problem, and I would add that Novitz's implicit conception of art seems to grow, directly or indirectly, from current preoccupations with personal and cultural identity. None of these kinds of theoretical approach, emerging as they do from the concerns of their originating cultures, seem to me especially appropriate to the arts of small-scale, nonliterate tribal societies, though each has partial relevance. I have in particular objected to Arthur C. Danto's analysis of tribal arts in terms of indiscernible artifacts of the contemporary Western artworld. His essay "Artifact and Art" was first published in Art/Artifact, ed. Susan M. Vogel (New York: Center for African Art, 1988). My response is "Tribal Art and Artifact," Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 51 (1993): 15-29.

I would not contend that art theory is explained away by being historicized and relativized to the social conditions or preoccupations of the theorist. But there is no denying Carroll's gentle suggestion that the artistic interests and preoccupations of a theorist have the potential to affect, intentionally or not, the scope and substance of a theory, and that much of the art theory of this century has been connected to justifications of avantgarde European art, and therefore, I would add, might be of only marginal relevance to understanding the arts of small-scale, nonliterate cultures. Moreover, the insistence by philosophers on trying to hone definitions to the greatest scope combined with the greatest simplicity, understood traditionally as a perspicuous and finite set of necessary and sufficient conditions, may work against understanding in a domain, in particular a domain as ragged and multilayered as that of tribal art. This, in any event, is the conclusion to which I have been forced by my own practical fieldwork and literature research into tribal arts, and in this respect at least I find myself in full agreement with Novitz's remark that "precise formulations and rigorous definitions" are of little help in capturing the meaning of art cross-culturally. Still, just because, as Novitz says, there is "no one way" to be a work of art, in tribal society or any other, it does not follow that the converse "many ways" are so hopelessly numerous as to be unspecifiable. In fact, that they are specifiable, however disputatiously, is required by the very existence of a literature on cross-cultural aesthetics, arguments which make it possible for Novitz or me to publish views on the subject in aesthetics journals.

These considerations persuade me to approach tribal arts as a subject for philosophic inquiry through an indefinite list of features characteristic of art in tribal, small-scale, nonliterate cultures. While I do not claim that any one feature on this list is indefeasibly criterial for art in a tribal context, this list, or something close to it, is what makes possible crosscultural discourse about art in general. Granting that there may be marginal cases, by arts I mean artifacts (sculptures, paintings, and decorated objects, such as tools or the human body) on the one hand, and performances (dances, music, and the composition and recitation of stories) on the other hand. Features on this list can be found in the work of such writers as Richard L. Anderson, (Richard L. Anderson, Calliope's Sisters: A Comparative Study of Philosophies of Art (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1990).) and the ethnographer and philosopher H. Gene Blocker, (H. Gene Blocker, The Aesthetics of Primitive Art (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1993).) and are even informally discussed by the philosopher Julius Moravcsik. (Julius Moravesik, "Why Philosophy of Art in a Cross-Cultural Perspective?" Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism S0 (1992); 233-49.) Although it is intended to apply to every known tribal society, it has larger relevance, since every known society, tribal or largescale, makes and appreciates some form of art object or artistic performance. Not every element on the list can be associated with or incorporated into every art of a small-scale, nonliterate culture, but most can be.

1. The art object, either narrative story, crafted artifact, or visual and aural performance, is a source of pleasure in itself, rather than a practical tool or source of information. Its material embodiment may be a tool (a shield, a knife) or a source of information (a sacred poem), but aspects of the embodiment give pleasure in experience aside from these practical or information considerations. (This pleasure is often called aesthetic pleasure; but I avoid the word aesthetic as implicitly circular, and in any event unnecessary, in this context.)

2. The making of the object or the performance requires the exercise of a specialized skill. This skill is learned in an apprentice tradition in some societies or in others may be picked up by anyone who finds that she or he "has a knack" for it. Where the skill is acquired by virtually everybody in the culture, such as with communal singing or dancing, there are still to be individuals who stand out by virtue of special talents. Technical artistic skills are noticed in small-scale societies and are generally admired.

3. Art objects and performances (including oral narratives) are made in recognizable styles, according to rules of form and composition. The degree of stylistic determination varies as much in tribal cultures as in the arts of literate civilizations, with some sacred objects and performances being tightly circumscribed by tradition, with others open to free, creative, individual variation. The style may be the culture's, or a family's, or be the invention of an individual; styles involve borrowing and sudden alteration, as well as slow, evolving changes.

4. There exists some kind of indigenous critical language of judgment and appreciation, simple or elaborate, that is applied to tribal arts. This may include the shop talk of art producers or evaluative discourse of audiences. Unlike the arts themselves, which can be immensely complicated, it has often been remarked that this critical discourse is in oral cultures sometimes rudimentary compared with the art discourse of literate European history. It can, however, be elaborate.

5. In widely varying degrees of naturalism, art objects, including sculptures, paintings, and oral narratives, represent or imitate real and imaginary experience of the world. The differences between naturalistic representation, highly stylized representation, and nonimitative symbolism are understood by artists and their audiences in ways directly intelligible to Western observers. (Thus Danto's view that there is "no distortion" in African art is certainly false from an indigenous perspective. ("David Hockney once told me that he believed that there is no such thing as distortion, and while I think him wrong in general, he is right about African art, where there are no distortions." Danto, "Artifact and Art," 32.) Africans understand the distinction between highly realistic representations and stylistically distorted images or symbols; the distinction between naturalistic realism and stylized distortion is not a cultural construction.)

6. The pleasures afforded by the arts of small-scale societies to their indigenous audiences are consciously intended by the makers of such objects, even if the object's indigenous meaning or importance is primarily utilitarian or nonartistic. Aesthetic or artistic pleasure as an accidental by-product of nonartistic activities is as common or as rare in tribal societies as it is in our society. The suggestion that tribal peoples might generally create things beautiful (to them or to us) without realizing it, or that they make things which are beautiful to us but to which they are wholly indifferent, is certainly false.

7. Works of art and artistic performances are frequently bracketed off from ordinary life, made a special and dramatic focus of experience. While there are plenty of mundane artistic objects and performances (such as decorated parts of Baule looms, or communal singing done to pass the time while mending fishing nets), every known culture has special artworks or performances which involve what Ellen Dissanayake calls "making special." (Ellen Dissanayake, Homo Aestheticus (New York: Free Press, 1992), chap. 3.) These occasions are often imbued with intense emotion.

8. Finally, and among the more important characteristics, the experience of art in tribal societies is an imaginative experience for both producers and audiences. The carving may realistically represent an animal, but as a sculpture it becomes an imaginative object. The same can be said of any story well told, whether mythology or personal history. The costumed dance by firelight, with its intense unity of purpose among the performers, possesses an imaginative element which transcends mere group exercise. In tribal cultures, as elsewhere in the history of human life, art happens in the theater of the imagination.

There are other potential candidates for this list, items which, though perhaps more marginal or controversial, might warrant inclusion. Blocker, for example, thinks there is a near universality in tribal societies of the idea that the artist is considered "eccentric, or a bit socially awkward." (Blocker, Aesthetics of Primitive Art, 148.) He also thinks the inherent tension between artistic tradition and novelty is a general aspect of tribal arts. I find both of these features appealing as candidates for the list, because they accord strikingly with my experience in the New Guinea village of Yentchenmangua. David Novitz's notion of art as affirming the identity of a culture is also a relevant potential general characteristic, and could be applied especially to the more theatrical, large-scale ceremonial occasions of tribal society, which often seem rather like patriotic rallies. But I shall for now limit the list to the central eight characteristics I have recounted.

In their introduction to The Adapted Mind, Jerome H. Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby contend that for the last few generations anthropologists have been prone systematically to overemphasize the differences between world cultures at the expense of recognizing similarities and pancultural universals. They quote with approval Maurice Bloch's remark that anthropologists are guilty of a form of "professional malpractice" in the extent to which they have tried "to exaggerate the exotic character of other cultures." (Jerome H. Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby, The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 43-44.) This tendency, as I have noted throughout, has certainly infected the anthropological approach to art. Such mystification in ethnographic aesthetics often consists in focusing attention on what in any event is a marginal instance of art in another culture, or perhaps not art at all, and treating it as though it were characteristic of some exotic aesthetic form undreamt of in our philosophy, and therefore assaulted our aesthetic ethnocentrism. The standard strategy is: find a putative art object in a tribal society about which early ethnographers were wrong, or one which confounds any simple attempt at understanding, and you've demonstrated that "they don't have art in our sense."

Among the Yoruba, twins are minor deities, and there is a genre of wood carvings to honor deceased twins, whose spirits in the older religion inhabit the sculptures. As Susan Vogel explains, however, this tradition is in decline, particularly among Muslim and Christian families. (Susan M. Vogel, "Elastic Continuum," in Africa Explores: 20th Century African Art, ed. Susan M. Vogel (New York: Center for African Art, 1991), 32-55, 88-89.) The older carvings, of which there are many stunning examples, are being replaced in' some instances by simplified carvings of low relief, and in others by cheap, imported, mass-produced, plastic dolls (with European features). Increasingly, no sculpture appears at all in the twin cult, but rather photographs, where the surviving twin often stands in for its deceased sibling. Both Vogel and David Novitz are impressed by the alacrity with which Yoruba people have been willing to supplant wood sculptures with cheap plastic dolls. Vogel sees these practices as "an updating of the tradition without rupture," as "an imaginative use of imported items as replacements for traditional artworks." Novitz draws from this phenomenon a more radical conclusion: the bey? sculptures, since they are so easily replaced by massproduced dolls that "most assuredly would not be considered art in our culture," are therefore "appreciated not for their originality, nor for their beauty, nor yet for their proportions; they are appreciated primarily as quasi-religious artifacts that allow the beneficial influence of the deceased twin to persist in the parents' lives" (27). The bey? carvings, Novitz says, "occupy a social space in Yoruba society that is remote from the social space occupied by works of art in our society."

I can see no argument in any of this showing why either the older or more recent ibeji carving is not art. Particularly the older the;? sculptures are (a) skillfully made objects, (b) produced in a recognizable, conventional style, (c) subject to a critical vocabulary among carvers and owners, (d) treated as very special objects, though in a private sense rather than for public display, (e) mimetic representations of the figure of a child, with conventional oversized head, and (f) imaginative objects- that is, they stand for the dead child and are inhabited by its spirit, but do not literally replace it. Taken together, these features are sufficient to call ibej? carvings works of art. In this respect I cannot share Vogel's bland acceptance of these changes as an imaginative updating of a tradition. Like the replacement of Pueblo pottery by cheap (and more practical) tin pots in the nineteenth-century Southwest, the invasion of the Yoruba ibe? cult by Taiwanese plastic toys does not constitute the further development of an artistic tradition, but its very death. In any event, none of this is relevant to whether historic or contemporary specimens of the;? carving are art. There may be many reasons for the ready acceptance of plastic dolls as ibeji. Certainly, the Christianizing of Yoruba life is a major factor. Perhaps there are Yoruba mothers who are too poor to commission carvings, or are simply uninterested in ihe? statues as distinctly Yoruba art (thus, incidentally, casting doubt on whether the enrichment or enhancement of Yoruba identity with art makes any difference to them, at least in this case). The brightly colored plastic dolls may even have sheer novelty appeal. But in general, that there are people in any culture who do not care for an indigenous art, or who lose interest in it long enough for it to die out, so far tells us nothing about whether it actually is an art form. To construe the importation of plastic dolls into Yoruba life as showing that they have a different concept of art from us, or that their ibej? carvings are not art in our sense, is yet another confounding, exoticizing, and mystifying digression in ethnographic aesthetics.

The concentration by theorists of ethnographic art on dubious cases drawn from the ambiguous margins of the artistic life of tribal peoples (areas where art disappears, or is gradually replaced by ritual, religion, or practical concerns), on misleadingly described artistic practices, or on needless attempts to make foreign arts exotic, has inclined many aestheticians to give up the search for artistic universals, or at best to remain silent on the subject. But neither the universality of art nor the universality of its central features is endangered by the existence of marginal or disputed cases of art in tribal (or European) culture. The investigation of ethnographic arts is only impeded by the dogmatic refusal to discuss and debate their general features. The list I have provided does not insist that each of its eight characteristics will be present in every work of art. I do claim that any human practice which had none of the features enumerated would not be art, and that any human practice which possessed most of them would be art; not "art in our sense," but art in the sense that characterizes it through the whole of human history. If this seems an unacceptably vague conclusion, that may be because the evolved, universal tendency of human beings to have art of some description in their lives does not produce a body of practice and artifact that is amenable to definition in terms precise enough to satisfy some theorists. But as anyone who has attempted figure drawing will attest, the human body, marvelous mechanism that it is, did not evolve in order to be an easy subject for artists. Nor, pace the simplifying impulses of theory, did the arts evolve in order to make life easy for philosophers.
