# Is Art Modern? Kristeller’s ‘Modern System of the Arts’ Reconsidered
by James I. Porter

Kristeller’s article ‘The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics’ is a classic statement of the view, now widely adopted but rarely examined, that aesthetics became possible only in the eighteenth-century with the emergence of the fine arts. I wish to contest this view, for three reasons. Firstly, Kristeller’s historical account can be questioned; alternative and equally plausible accounts are available. Secondly, ‘the modern system of the arts’ appears to have been neither a system nor an agreed upon entity, but only a historical construct of Kristeller’s own making that matches up with no known historical reality. Thirdly, while the concept of the fine arts existed in the eighteenth century, the assumption that it had an impact on the rise of aesthetic theory remains unproven and unnecessary. A more satisfactory account of aesthetic thought in antiquity can be given, once the ‘fine-arts’ objection has been cleared away.

>What was the first man, was he a hunter, a toolmaker, a farmer, a worker, a priest, or a politician? Undoubtedly the first man was an artist. ...

>Man’s first expression, like his first dream, was an aesthetic one.  
- Barnett Newman (1947)

>Consider the famous anecdote about Sophocles in Ion of Chios (FGrHist 392 F6). At a dinner-party on Chios the presence of a very handsome young male slave prompts Sophocles to quote a phrase from Phrynichos, to which a literal-minded schoolmaster takes exception, and Sophocles flattens him by citing instances of poetic license in the use of color-terms from Simonides and Pindar. [...] There is abundant evidence that in preliterate cultures the composition of songs is a process in which discussion and criticism, often passionate, play an important part and inevitably so, because any aesthetic reaction implies preference, and preference implies criticism. Is anyone prepared to say that the conversation described in Ion fr. 6 was impossible in the Bronze Age? I, for one, am not.  
- K. J. Dover (1993)

In 1951–52, Paul Oskar Kristeller published an article in the Journal of the History of Ideas that proved to be a classic, ‘The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics’. Classic is perhaps too modest a description, as the leading ideas in Kristeller’s piece were subsequently adopted as established orthodoxy among historians and philosophers of art and by intellectual and cultural historians, and they are now more or less legion. Kristeller’s view is adopted by Iris Murdoch, The Fire and the Sun: Why Plato Banished the Artists , first published in 1977 (Oxford: Oxford U.P., 1978), pp. 6 – 7, who claims to be following Bosanquet (but see at n. 7 below). Cf. Philip Alperson and Noël Carroll, ‘Music, Mind, and Morality: Arousing the Body Politic’ , Journal of Aesthetic Education , vol. 42, no. 1 (2008), pp. 1 – 15; here, p. 1: ‘In the eighteenth century the Modern System of the Arts was born. [...] These are what we might call the arts with a capital “A”’ . Kristeller’s original article has been widely anthologized, most recently in Peter Kivy (ed.), Essays on the History of Aesthetics (Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press, 1992), pp. 3 – 64. An influential abridged version appeared as Paul Oskar Kristeller, ‘ Origins of Aesthetics: Historical and Conceptual Overview ’ , in Michael Kelly (ed.), Encyclopedia of Aesthetics (Oxford: Oxford U.P., 1997), vol. 3, pp. 416 – 428. More recently, his views were developed at book length by Larry Shiner, though with no real change in substance. (Larry Shiner, The Invention of Art: A Cultural History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001).) Classicists, who stand least to gain from Kristeller’s views, have been remarkably quiet about them, and a few have adopted them (see below). The challenges to Kristeller’s central ideas have been, to my knowledge, minimal. In short, we are having to do here no longer with an academic thesis, and not even with an orthodoxy, but with a dogma.

My intention in the present paper is to confront Kristeller’s article directly, as I believe it contains a number of untenable and potentially quite damaging assumptions and conclusions, both about the history of art and aesthetics (ancient and modern), and about the fundamental nature of aesthetic reflection and inquiry. I will begin by summarizing Kristeller’s views. Then I will show how his position rests on a narrative description of what it depicts, one that is by no means unassailable. Alternative stories are available, and these offer dramatically different pictures of the same ground that Kristeller covers in his essay. Thirdly, I will demonstrate how the evidence Kristeller seeks to muster for his argument in fact stands in contradiction to his primary claims, taking Charles Batteux as my chief exhibit (Batteux is Kristeller’s key and best single witness). Then I will turn to the fallacy of aesthetic autonomy, the emergence of which Kristeller’s historical picture is designed to explain. At issue here is whether aesthetic reflection (or theorizing) is conceivable in the absence of a theory of aesthetic autonomy, and consequently whether art itself is conceivable as a category of thought before the eighteenth century. Kristeller’s answer is ‘No’ , but this seems wrong in every possible way — historically, logically, and methodologically. Finally, I will offer a few hints as to how one can go about conducting a more satisfactory account of the rise and evolution of aesthetic thought in classical antiquity, once Kristeller’s objections have been cleared away. Kristeller’s views about the modern system of the arts (so-called) are as vital to the way we grasp the Greek and Roman past as they are to the way we grasp the modern world. What follows will pertain to both.

## The Modern System of the Arts

By ‘modern system of the arts’ Kristeller understands ‘the irreducible nucleus’ of five art forms that together comprise the fine arts (beaux-arts): painting, sculpture, architecture, music, and poetry. Decorative arts, engraving, gardening, dance, theatre, opera, ‘and finally eloquence and prose literature’ were added as an afterthought, historically speaking; these, in any event, never won universal consensus, unlike the five previous arts, which did. The point is that the fine arts so constituted are set off from crafts, sciences, ‘and other human activities’: they enjoy relative autonomy, are freed from utilitarian objectives, and are guided by no moral agendas. This separation is supposed to have occurred in the eighteenth century. Paul Oskar Kristeller, ‘The Modern System of the Arts’ , in Renaissance Thought and the Arts: Collected Essays (expanded edition, Princeton, NJ: Princeton U.P., 1990), pp. 163 – 227, 165. While Kristeller does not use the expression ‘aesthetic autonomy’ , he invokes the concept through functionally identical ideas, such as the ‘separation’ or ‘distinction’ of the arts from ‘other human activities’ ( ibid .), especially from ‘morality’ (p. 199), and not least through the invocation of ‘(modern)aesthetics’ as a self-standing discipline (p. 165, and passim ), which he takes to represent this very separation — as does Shiner, who adopts the language of ‘autonomy’ in Kristeller’s wake (Shiner, The Invention of Art , pp. 4, 13–14, 23, 305, etc.). Incidentally, Collingwood, one of Kristeller’s influences (see next note), is explicit on this point: ‘The aesthetic experience is an autonomous activity’ (R. G. Collingwood, The Principles of Art (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1938), p. 40). The ancients, by contrast, had no such unified conception of art or beauty. A series of negative comparisons ensues. The ancients did not separate moral beauty from beauty in art. They did ‘not treat music or the dance as separate arts but rather as elements of certain types of poetry, especially of lyric and dramatic poetry’. The ‘emancipation of instrumental music from poetry’ occurred only late in the day. The social and intellectual prestige of painting, sculpture, and architecture ‘was much lower than one might expect from [the] actual achievements’ that were made in these areas. ‘No ancient philosopher [...] wrote a separate systematic treatise on the visual arts or assigned to them a prominent place in his scheme of knowledge’ (p. 174). In short,

>we have to admit the conclusion, distasteful to many historians of aesthetics but grudgingly admitted by most of them, that ancient writers and thinkers, though confronted with excellent works of art and quite susceptible to their charm, were neither able nor eager to detach the aesthetic quality of these works of art from their intellectual, moral, religious and practical function or content, or to use such an aesthetic quality as a standard for grouping the fine arts together or for making them the subject of a comprehensive philosophical interpretation. (ibid.)

Kristeller is far from being alone in his disparagement of the ancients’ capacity for aesthetic reflection. The kernel of his historical thesis derives from Julius Schlosser’s Die Kunstliteratur , while his philosophical assumptions are derived at least in part from R. G. Collingwood, as Kristeller acknowledges. Julius Schlosser, Die Kunstliteratur: Ein Handbuch zur Quellenkunde der neueren Kunstgeschichte (Vienna: A. Schroll & Co., 1924), pp. 46 – 55; Kristeller, ‘The Modern System of the Arts’ , p. 174 n. 79, etc. Collingwood, The Principles of Art, esp. pp. 1 – 56 (whence the distinction between fi ne arts and crafts (or ‘ useful arts ’ ); the denial to Plato and other ancient Greeks of any concept of art; and the view of what counts as aesthetic autonomy); Kristeller, ‘ The Modern System of the Arts ’ , p. 164 n. 3; cf. ibid ., p. 166 n. 12. For strikingly similar views, see also Władysław Tatarkiewicz,
‘Art and Poetry: A Contribution to the History of Ancient Aesthetics’, Studia Philosophica, vol. 2 (1937), pp. 367 – 418. Another early exponent of the same view is Schlosser’s contemporary, Erwin Panofsky, who accuses Plato of failing to think aesthetically because he was unable to separate metaphysical from aesthetic questions. Accordingly, Plato was incapable of contributing to art theory. Erwin Panofsky, “Idea”: Ein Beitrag zur Begriffsgeschichte der älteren Kunsttheorie (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1924; repr. of 2nd edn,
Berlin: Volker Spiess, 1993), p. 2. Ernst Cassirer holds a similar view: ‘Eidos und Eidolon’, first published in 1924, reprinted in Birgit Recki (ed.), Ernst Cassirer, Gesammelte Werke (Hamburg: Meiner, 1998), vol. 15, pp. 135 – 163, esp. p. 137. This conclusion about Plato is later assented to by Eva Keuls on grounds that would, moreover, exclude Kant from the history of aesthetics — for instance, given Plato’s failure to privilege artistic beauty over natural beauty. Eva C. Keuls, Plato and Greek Painting (Leiden: Brill, 1978), p. 56, and passim . See also Alexander Nehamas, ‘Plato and the Mass Media’, in Virtues of Authenticity: Essays on Plato and Socrates (Princeton, NJ: Princeton U.P., 1999), pp. 279 – 299 (citing Kristeller). To be sure, Plato in particular has not lacked his advocates, among them Bernard Bosanquet, Edgar Wind, Pierre-Maxime Schuhl, Bernhard Schweitzer, and, from an unsuspected quarter, Erich Auerbach in his book on Dante from 1929, each of whom produced powerful appreciations of Plato’s aesthetic theories. Bernard Bosanquet, A History of Aesthetic , fi rst published in 1892, 2nd edn (London: Allen & Unwin, 1956), e.g. p. 1: ‘But the thing [‘Aesthetic’] existed before the name’ ; Edgar Wind, qeVFbV: (Laws , II, 671D): ‘On Plato’s Philosophy of Art’ , in id., The Eloquence of Symbols: Studies in Humanist Art , first published in 1932, ed. Jaynie Anderson (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), pp. 1 – 20; Pierre-Maxime Schuhl, Platon et l’art de son temps (arts plastiques) , first published in 1933, 2nd, revised and augmented edn (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1952); Bernhard Schweitzer, Platon und die bildende Kunst der Griechen (Tübingen: Max Niemeyer, 1953); Erich Auerbach, Dante als Dichter der irdischen Welt (Berlin: W. de Gruyter, 1929), pp. 8 – 15. Nor has Kristeller’s view gone unchallenged here and there, though the nearly otherwise unquestioned orthodoxy it has enjoyed is astonishing. For three differently critical views of Kristeller, see Stephen Halliwell, The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern Problems (Princeton, NJ: Princeton U.P., 2002), pp. 7 – 9; Charles Martindale, Latin Poetry and the Judgment of Taste: An Essay in Aesthetics (Oxford: Oxford U.P., 2004), pp. 31 – 33; and Walter G. Leszl, ‘Plato’s Attitude to Poetry and the Fine Arts and the Origins of Aesthetics: Part I’, Études platoniciennes, vol. 1 (2004), pp. 113 – 197, esp. 117 – 130. Nevertheless, it is one thing to appreciate Plato and quite another to come to grips with the underlying thesis of Kristeller’s positions, which require more than a casual dismissal. His position is strong, at least rhetorically. The question is whether it can hold up to a more sustained scrutiny, one it seems not yet to have found.

These concerns stem from an interest of my own in recovering the traditions of aesthetic reflection in Greece and Rome, which Kristeller’s position effectively prohibits from the outset. If art and aesthetics, conceived as quasi-autonomous activities, are modern constructs, how can we go about treating these phenomena in antiquity? The problem, so stated, is badly formed. But to say this is hardly enough to get an argument off the ground. One must fi rst confront the source of the problem, which lies in the way in which it was fi rst formulated in its most recognizable form today, namely in Kristeller’s article from 1951.

## Alternative Historical Views

There are difficulties with Kristeller’s picture, starting with its historical validity. Is it even true as a description of the state of the arts in the eighteenth century? This depends on where one looks. Clement Greenberg gives a radically different picture of the same era in his equally renowned 1940 essay, ‘Towards a Newer Laocoon’ . In his view, the arts were dominated by a single art form by the time the seventeenth century arrived in Europe namely literature. ‘A confusion of the arts’ resulted, whereby each art sought to assimilate itself to the dominant literary form, ‘pretend[ing] to conceal their mediums [so] as to annihilate [these] seemingly in favor of illusion.’ (Clement Greenberg, ‘ Towards a Newer Laocoon ’ , in id., The Collected Essays and Criticism , fi rst published in 1940,
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986 – 93), pp. 23 – 38, vol. 1, p. 24; emphasis in original.) Greenberg’s analysis of the situation of the arts in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is worth quoting at length, not only for the polar contrast it makes with Kristeller’s historical picture, but also for its striking similarities with the situation of the arts of antiquity as depicted by Kristeller:

>Painting and sculpture, the arts of illusion par excellence, had by that time [i.e. the eighteenth century] achieved such facility as to make them infi nitely susceptible to the temptation to emulate the effects, not only of illusion, but of other arts. Not only could painting imitate sculpture, and sculpture, painting, but both could attempt to reproduce the effects of literature. And it was for the effects of literature that 17th and 18th century painting strained most of all. Literature, for a number of reasons, had won the upper hand, and the plastic arts — especially in the form of easel painting and statuary — tried to win admission to its domain.

Greenberg, to be sure, is not all that happy with this self-erasure of the arts and their media in the face of literature, and he wastes no time saying so in the next breath:

>Although this does not account completely for the decline of those arts during this period it seems to have been the form of that decline. Decline it was, compared to what had taken place in Italy, Flanders, Spain and Germany the century before. (pp.
24 – 25)

In a word, the non-literary arts had become the ‘stooges’ of literature. Thus, in the place of a nucleus of five beaux arts forms enjoying well-defined boundaries, Greenberg points to a strong collaborative fusion (or ‘confusion’ ) of the arts under the umbrella of literature, much as Kristeller would later describe ancient music and dance as adjuncts of ancient poetry. Greenberg’s analysis of the arts in Enlightenment Europe stands Kristeller’s picture on its head. The modern system of the arts, so described, is not only confused. It is also a sign of ‘decline’. And in no way does it constitute a radical breakthrough in the history of thought, not least because it barely constitutes an ordered system at all. Lessing’s Laokoon (1764), with its rigorous distinction of painting and poetry, is best understood as a reaction to this situation of the arts (whence the title of Greenberg’s essay).

Nor is Batteux (1713 – 1780), whom Kristeller introduces as the inaugurator and perfecter of the modern system of the arts, a disconfirming example for Greenberg. Quite the contrary. The system he lays out in his masterwork, Les beaux arts réduits à une même principe, with its clear origins in Aristotle’s Poetics, only confirms Greenberg’s impression that literature is the dominant model of analysis in the eighteenth century. Compare what Batteux writes in his Avant-propos:

>This is what produced this little work, wherein it is quite evident that poetry should occupy pride of place, owing as much to its dignity as to the fact that poetry was its occasion. [...] It was thus in searching for a single defi nition of poetry that this work was formed, almost without design and by a progression of ideas, the fi rst of which was the germ of all the others.  
- Charles Batteux, Les beaux arts réduits à un même principe (Paris: Durand, 1747; repr. Johnson Reprint Corporation: New York, 1970), pp. ix, xiii. Cf. ibid ., p. 262.

And in fact most of his treatise is taken up with poetry, as was true of its model, the Poetics. So much for a lateral distribution of the arts.

Worse still, Greenberg’s picture of decline deepens over the next century, and it isn’t until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, with the debut of the avant-garde, dated by Greenberg to Courbet’s new realism and the rise of Impressionism in his wake, that the arts fi nally asserted their autonomy. By this self-assertion of the arts Greenberg means the assertion of their independence from literature (understood more broadly as ‘subject matter’ ) and their discovery of properly expressive forms and media — a discovery that is quickly traded in for new illusory effects, involving a renewed confusion of the arts, this time salutary, because they subserved no single art form in particular. What is more, and of particular relevance to the present essay, the breakthrough of the new, as it were, system of the arts in the late nineteenth century happened to coincide with a new, studied pursuit of ‘ materialistic objectivity’ , ‘a new flatness’ (Greenberg’s aesthetic rallying cry in the 1940s and 1950s, and even later), a new, ‘almost complete absorption in the very physical quality of [the] medium’, a new rapture at ever ‘more immediate and more powerful sensations’ , and, finally, ‘a new confusion of the arts’, as each art form sought to borrow ‘the procedures and effects of some other art’, whether this was music seeking out coloristic effects in Impressionism, or painting returning the favor with its moods and rhythms, or poetry imitating painting and sculpture (e.g. through imagism). (‘Towards a Newer Laocoon’ , pp. 28 – 31. Cf. Charles Baudelaire, Curiosités esthétiques, L'art romantique, et autres oeuvres critiques, ed. H. Lemaître (Paris, Éditions Garnier Frères, 1962), p. 104, noting this very blending together of the arts, albeit lamenting it as a form of decadence.)

Greenberg’s history of art could not be more diametrically opposed to Kristeller’s than it already is. One methodological difference needs to be pointed out: Kristeller’s evidence about the arts is drawn from contemporary treatises on art, while Greenberg’s is partly derived from observations about the arts themselves. Where in the eighteenth century Kristeller sees crystallization, co-ordination, and system, Greenberg sees decline, conflation, and confusion. Where Kristeller sees clean lines and horizontal differentiation (with the arts walled off and compartmentalized), Greenberg sees opacity and vertical subordination (under literature — a trait that Kristeller reserves for antiquity See Kristeller, ‘The Modern System of the Arts’ , p. 169 (on Plato and Aristotle).). Where in the next century Kristeller sees formal purity and aesthetic autonomy, Greenberg sees an intense cross-pollination of the arts, albeit sans subordination (especially in the latter part of the century). Incidentally, what kind of materialism or even functional specifi city does Kristeller allow to his systematized arts? The answer is obvious: next to none. They exist as colourless elements of a total system, which has one purpose only: to classify the arts. (The limitations of classifi cation as a criterion of art and of aesthetic refl ection will be discussed below.)

A third alternative historical view is available, according to which the rise of modern aesthetic theory was due not to an obsession with formal purism and questions of autonomy, but to the rise of empiricism and sensualism during the Enlightenment — whence Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten’s treatise on the science of sensate perception (sensa) and sensate representations (representationes sensitivae) from 1735 (Meditationes philosophicae de nonnullis ad poema pertinentibus) and his Aesthetica from 1750, to take just these two instances, which are usually cited together as the single founding moment of modern aesthetic theory, though opinions vary, and British empiricism has an equally rightful claim to the honour. See Jerome Stolnitz, ‘On the Origins of “ Aesthetic Disinterestedness”’, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , vol. 20, no. 2 (1961), pp. 131 – 143: ‘The British did not invent and never use[d] the words “ aesthetic” or “aesthetics” , but it is simply frivolous to allow this to decide who ‘created’ aesthetic theory. The British were the first to envision the possibility of a philosophical discipline, embracing the study of all of the arts, one which would be, moreover, autonomous, because its subject matter is not explicable by any of the other disciplines.’ Here, the obvious candidates are Locke, Hume, Burke, Addison, Priestley, and others. If this is right, and it is a commonplace view today, then aesthetics was engaged from the fi rst with a mapping of the senses, while whether the so-called modern system of the arts is the fruit of this activity or not remains an open question. Another instance of this tendency to empiricism is none other than Kristeller’s hero, Charles Batteux, who was infl uenced indirectly by Locke’s empiricism through Voltaire’s sensualism, and who later went on to translate Epicurus and to defend Epicureanism in his La morale d ’ Épicure, tirée de ses propres écrits (1758). For the general thesis about the concurrence of the rise of empiricism and materialism and the rise of aesthetics, see Stolnitz, ‘ Locke and the Categories of Value in Eighteenth-Century British Aesthetic Theory ’ , Philosophy , vol. 38, no. 143 (1963), pp. 40 – 51; Terry Eagleton, The Ideology of the Aesthetic (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990), ch. 2; Dabney Townsend, ‘Lockean Aesthetics’, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, vol. 49, no. 4 (1991), pp. 349 – 361.

Once again, if we take this historical approach, then Kristeller’s focus comes up short, for it presents the problem of Enlightenment aesthetics as one of a rational containment, when in fact what seems to have been at stake was, in Jacques Rancière’s terms, a ‘ distribution of the sensible ’ . (Jacques Rancière, The Politics of Aesthetics: The Distribution of the Sensible , trans. Gabriel Rockhill (London and New York: Continuum, 2006).) Nor is the system of the fine arts an issue on the empiricist view. Baumgarten ignores it, and so do Hume, Burke, Lessing, and (for the most part) Kant. (Kant knows about the fine arts ( CJ §§ 51 – 53). But he measures them according to their approximation to the free
beauty of nature as received by the imagination.) On this alternative picture, modern aesthetics, true to its name, comes about with a sudden attention to empirical sensation. (Aesthetics, after all, derives from the Greek word aisthêsis , which encompasses sensation, perception, and feeling — this is what Baumgarten was alluding to with his coinage.) Sensation is eventually rationalized and the philosophical discipline is born, though in time the need for a renewal of the senses is felt and another surge in the direction of materialism occurs midway through the nineteenth century. (Cf. Eagleton, The Ideology of the Aesthetic , pp. 32 – 33: ‘ The proto-materialist impulse of [early German aesthetics] soon surrenders to a full-blown formalism; indeed no sooner has sensation been ushered into the court of reason then [ sic ] it is subjected to a rigorous discrimination.’ But the pendulum eventually swings back the other way again, starting with the second half of the nineteenth century, as the accounts by Greenberg, T. J. Clark, and others make abundantly clear.) Hence the reassertion of materialism in art with the later avant-garde as described by Greenberg and the ‘new confusion of the arts’ which this refocusing of the sensible brings in its train, the arts being prone to sensual confl ations by their very promiscuous nature. Much the same occurs at different moments in antiquity too — a tendency that, in Kristeller’s eyes, would disqualify antiquity from entertaining deeper thoughts about the nature of aesthetics. By worrying about walls and ladders (hierarchies) and not about experiential forms, Kristeller puts the emphasis in the wrong place.

## Charles Batteux on Les Beaux Arts (1746)
Big-picture problems aside, it is questionable whether the distinctions sought after by Kristeller were ever actually achieved even in the eighteenth century. Batteux’s Les beaux arts réduits à une même principe (1746), adduced by Kristeller as ‘ the decisive step toward a system of the fi ne arts ’ , is a case in point, as it fl atly contradicts nearly every element in Kristeller’s argument: The decisive step toward a system of the fi ne arts was taken by the Abbé Batteux in his famous and infl uential treatise, Les beaux arts réduits à une même principe (1746). . . . He was the fi rst to set forth a clearcut system of the fi ne arts in a treatise devoted exclusively to this subject. This alone may account for his claim to originality as well as for the enormous infl uence he exercised both in France and abroad, especially in Germany. Batteux codifi ed the modern system of the fi ne arts almost in its fi nal form, whereas all previous authors had merely prepared it. (Kristeller, ' The Modern System of the Arts ' , pp. 199 – 200) True, Batteux does organize the fi ne arts around a principle (the imitation of nature) and he does limit membership in their club by virtue of this same principle (the fi ne arts are indeed restricted to fi ve: music, poetry, painting, sculpture, and — here, unlike in later authors, perhaps — ‘ the art of gesture or dance ’ , p. 6). And he further acknowledges that each of these arts imitates in its own manner, while all of them have as their primary object the provision of pleasure (p. 7). (As we shall see in a moment, the fi rst and more basic criterion of imitation undermines the impression that pleasure is the primary — necessary and suffi cient — criterion of good poetry.) Even so, there is nothing remarkably modern about these claims, which are explicitly drawn from Aristotle, Horace, and Plutarch. Indeed, citing Aristotle’s Poetics , chapter 1 in Greek, Batteux derives four of his fi ve beaux arts and their criterial difference from this source alone: ‘ la Musique, la Danse, la Poësie, la Peinture, sont des Arts imitateurs [. . . Poët . cap. I ] ’ . 19 Sculpture, the fi fth item on Batteux’s list, does not appear in the opening sections of the Poetics or in any other section of that treatise, but it does appear elsewhere, for example in Aristotle’s Rhetoric : ‘ painting, sculpture, poetry — and every product of skilful imitation ’ . 20 In terms of the Querelle des Anciens et des Modernes , already fairly exhausted by the time, Batteux comes down as a balanced moderate, conceding different capacities to the ancients and to the moderns, while remaining heavily classicizing and generally favourable to the ancients. 21 Batteux, after all, was Professor of Rhetoric at the Collège Royal de Navarre in Paris (1745 – 1750) and then assumed the chair of Greek and Roman philosophy at the Collège de France in 1750.
Nevertheless, Kristeller seeks to palliate Batteux’s classicism by suggesting that Aristotle and Horace are mere starting points for Batteux’s theory, and that the principle of imitation gave Batteux a respectable cover — ‘ the appearance of ancient authority ’ — as he went about his true business, which was to ‘ group the fi ne arts together ’ , while in Batteux’s later reception, the principle ‘ could be replaced ’ once the system ‘ had been so fi rmly

established as no longer to need the ancient principle of imitation to link them together ’ (p. 200; emphasis added). This seems utterly wrong, as Batteux’s title suggests by itself: Les beaux arts réduits à une même principe does not mean that the principle in question (imitation) is being reduced to the beaux arts. Quite the contrary, it is the beaux arts that are being reduced to the classical — and indeed, Aristotelian — principle of imitation . In fact, the entire concept is in Batteux’s eyes ancient, not modern: ‘ the principle of imitation, which the Greek philosopher [sc. Aristotle] establishes for the beaux arts , astonished me ’ when Batteux fi rst encountered the Poetics (p. viii). Nor does Batteux have the slightest inkling that the beaux arts came into existence in his own century. (Indeed, it is unclear whether any other eighteenthcentury writer knows this either.) Kristeller is rewriting Batteux’s study for him, which would be unthinkable without its classicism and without its principle of imitation.
There is no modernist battle cry here, and not a whiff of a realignment of art around a new axis of aesthetics, let alone autonomy. But that is not all.
Kristeller’s promotion of the modern system of the arts is coupled with a critique of the ancients, on the grounds that antiquity lacked any such system. But this critique is strikingly odd, as it reads, in fact, like a critique of Batteux. Here are Kristeller’s reasons against antiquity: Passages have been collected from the writings of Plato and Aristotle from which it appears quite clearly that they considered poetry, music, the dance, painting and sculpture as different forms of imitation. This fact is signifi cant so far as it goes, and it has infl uenced many later authors, even in the eighteenth century. But aside from the fact that (i) none of the passages has a systematic character or (ii) even enumerates all of the ‘ fi ne arts ’ together, it should be noted that the scheme (iii) excludes architecture, that (iv) music and the dance are treated as parts of poetry and not as separate arts, and (v) that on the other hand the individual branches or subdivisions of poetry and of music seem to be put on a par with painting or sculpture. (pp. 171 – 72; my numeration) This set of claims contains several problems, and even fallacies, which I will simply list in order: (i) the work that furnishes Batteux with his model of the system of the fi ne arts happens to be Aristotle’s Poetics , and that work is heavily systematic throughout, far more so than Batteux’s own; (ii) many of the ancient passages in question concerning the various art forms do in fact occur together, as in Aristotle’s Poetics , as Batteux was the fi rst to admit; (iii) architecture is discussed in Plato’s Sophist and elsewhere in early and later antiquity (we know of entire treatises on the art), but that is irrelevant: on Kristeller’s own admission, architecture does not form part of the original ‘ nucleus ’ of the fi ve fi ne arts for Batteux (these, Kristeller says, comprised ‘ music, poetry, painting, sculpture, and the dance ’ , p. 200 22 ); indeed, one has to wonder where and how Kristeller arrives at his nucleus of fi ve fi ne arts, which looks to be his own , and which differs markedly from Batteux’s (Batteux includes dance but not architecture); in the place of any historical references, we are merely given bluff assertion (one that is manifestly false): ‘ these [sc. Kristeller’s] fi ve constitute the irreducible nucleus of the modern system of the arts, on which all writers and thinkers

seem to agree ’ (p. 165; emphasis added); 23 (iv) is plainly false for any ancient author I am aware of; 24 it is unclear what the sense of the phrase ‘ on a par ’ is in (v), nor what ancient evidence might bear out the apparent meaning of (v) — or even why the arts ’ being so ranked should matter on Kristeller’s own terms (painting and sculpture ought to have been relegated to inferior positions on his reading of the ancient evidence, not to a position of equality; cf. p. 174; quoted on p. 7 above).
There is a further obstacle. If Kristeller is hoping to discover in the modern system of the arts a conceptualization of aesthetics that renders aesthetics immune from moral considerations (and he undoubtedly is), Batteux is not his man. 25 On the contrary, Batteux makes it unmistakably clear that nothing could be further removed from his mind than the separation of art and morals. The fi rst section of Part Three, Chapter 3 bears a title that says it all: ‘ General Rule of Poetry: To Join ( Joindre ) the Useful ( l’utile ) ’ — a category that includes morals — ‘ with the Pleasurable ( l’agréable ) ’ (p. 156). The language repeats terms from early on in the treatise: ‘ the pleasurable and the useful should be brought together in poetry and in prose ’ (p. 50). The terms are, moreover, drawn directly from Horace’s famous paradigm of prodesse and delectare , as the next page confi rms: In effect, if in nature and the arts, things affect us ( nous touchent ) in proportion to the connection ( le rapport ) that they have to us, it follows that works that have the double connection of pleasure and utility will touch us more than those which have only one of the two. That is the precept of Horace: Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci, Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo .
[Whoever blends usefulness and sweetness wins every point, both delighting and instructing the reader. ( Ars poetica , vv. 343 – 344)] (pp. 156 – 157; emphasis as in Batteux) As one reads on, it becomes clear that Batteux fi rmly believes in the moral mission of poetry.
Poetry’s role is not senseless hedonism: it has a content; it treats of objects in the real world; and it has a purpose, which is not to violate the orders of truth and propriety ( sagesse ); if anything, the mission of poetry is to contribute to truth and propriety, if need be by ‘ concealing ’ its hard precepts under the more palatable guise of pretty images, and by helping to remove the harmful passions, which it is the job of pleasure to perform (pp. 157 – 162). Hence,

The aim of poetry is to please, and to please by stirring the passions. But in order to give us a perfect and solid pleasure, its role is, and has been, never to stir any passions except those which it is important for us to feel vividly, and not those which are enemies of propriety ( ennemies de la sagesse ). (p. 157) And so too, it should not surprise us that, given the choice between the aesthetically pleasing Vergil and the more morally rewarding Horace, Batteux is prepared to cast his vote with the latter. For Horace’s works are ‘ more instructive for us today ’ (p. 162). 26 Not for nothing does Horace supply the book’s motto on the title page: ex noto fi ctum [sc. carmen ] sequar ( ‘ I will pursue [poetry] that is made of what is known ’ ( Ars poetica , v.240)). Horace is exemplary of the way all poetry in any age should be. And yet, Batteux must go back to Horace to fi nd this universal exemplum .
Interestingly enough, the same sort of argument about moral content applies to the perception of aesthetic forms, a question that Batteux arrives at when he asks whether a poem without versifi cation or with its parts in disarray remains a poem or not. The answer he gives is that such a poem does remain a poem, the primary criterion being that it ‘ display objects ’ and that the objects be imitative, as if poetry’s quality derived from this quality of its objects and not from any intrinsic features of the physical medium of poetry itself (p. 153). The position is improbably strained (it leaves unclear what defi nes poetry as opposed to prose), but it is at least consistent with Batteux’s starting (and reductive) assumption that poems are essentially imitative of reality. 27 And for the same reason, Batteux is willing to concede that, while poetry’s primary object is not moral instruction, neither is poetry conceivable in the absence of content, whether moral or other. After all, imitation is the fi rst criterion of art, then comes pleasure. Of interest to us here is how, in denying formal features to poetry’s essence, Batteux paints himself into a corner opposite that of aesthetic formalism — and, one should have thought, opposite that of anyone who holds a rigorous view of aesthetic autonomy of the sort described by Kristeller.
Assume that you have a poem whose verses have been contorted, dispersed, their meters broken, their features ruptured the poetry of things [viz. poetry viewed with respect to its content, not its form] persists nonetheless ( la poësie des choses reste toujours ); one rediscovers it again in [the poet’s] dispersed parts.
Invenias etiam disjecti membra Poëtae.
[You will discover the limbs of even the dismembered poet. (Horace Serm. 1.4.62)]

This does not prevent one from disagreeing that a poem without versifi cation will not be a poem. (p. 146) More simply put, poetry minus versifi cation is and remains a poem, but poetry minus (poetic) content does not (for otherwise poetry could not be imitative at all), while poetry containing morally objectionable content is bad poetry, plain and simple. Good poetry, meanwhile, will display morally approved content. And once it is combined with normative designs, Batteux’s imitative criterion becomes unfl inchingly utilitarian. Indeed, the purely formal defi nition of poetry ( qua imitative of content) seems calculated to pave the way for poetry’s moral, normative stipulation. Here are some of the proper passions that good poetry should arouse in us: The horror of crime, in whose wake follow shame, fear, remorse, not counting the other torments: compassion for the wretched, which has a utility nearly as far-reaching as humanity itself; admiration for great [personal] examples, who implant in the heart the goad to virtue — voilà , confesses the whole world, such are the passions that poetry should treat, which is not made to foment corruption in spoiled hearts, but in order to be a delight to virtuous souls. (pp. 157 – 158) One has to wonder how closely Kristeller has read his Batteux. 28 Kristeller does acknowledge that morals and utility have a place in Batteux’s system, but this recognition is too limited, as it extends only to the third of three groupings that Kristeller discerns: beyond the fi ne arts ‘ which have pleasure for their end ’ and the mechanical arts, Batteux ‘ adds a third group which combines pleasure and usefulness ’ , and he ‘ puts eloquence and architecture in this category ’ (p. 200). This is obviously an inadequate account of Batteux, who permits morals and utility to operate at the very heart of his conception of the beaux arts . Indeed, he does so in virtue of the very principle of imitation that Kristeller believes is the least essential ingredient of his system.
Kristeller’s account of the formation of the modern system of the arts in its ‘ fi rst ’ and (almost) ‘ fi nal ’ form is defi cient in every respect. It might be objected that Batteux fi gures only briefl y in Kristeller’s account (a page plus), and that to fasten on to him as I have done is to give Batteux inordinate evidential weight. Not so. Firstly, it is Kristeller himself who makes Batteux a pivotal, indeed essential and completing, fi gure in his story. Without Batteux, another Batteux would have to have been invented to conjure up the notion of a ‘ system ’ of fi ne arts. The problem for Kristeller is that the Batteux we have — the historical Batteux — completely vitiates Kristeller’s claims about what it is that the modern system of the arts does, namely, the job of isolating (fi ne) arts from moral and other utility. Secondly, once he is introduced, Batteux becomes a household name in the pages that follow (he is mentioned at least twenty-two times after his initial cameo appearance). Thus, by keeping Batteux alive as a recurring point of reference in what follows, Batteux’s ‘ infl uence ’ (p. 216) is extended well beyond his fi rst mention (p. 199), and he becomes a major ( ‘ enormous ’ ) historical force in Kristeller’s narrative.
These reservations regarding Batteux ought to set off alarms. Did the modern system of the arts, in the form that Kristeller wants us to imagine it, ever exist at all ? I believe it did not, because that system is a historical construct that has been put together by Kristeller himself, one that is all the trickier in that it is exemplifi ed perfectly by no one, but is instead elaborated through a series of fl eeting cameos much like Batteux’s. While Batteux is the foundation of this edifi ce, and seductive inasmuch as he uniquely names the beaux arts as a ‘ system ’ , the remaining examples are no stronger.
Curiously, Batteux’s system effl oresces and then disappears at a stroke in Kristeller’s account. Once it is disseminated, it is either ‘ taken for granted ’ or ‘ disputed ’ in its particulars, as Kristeller acknowledges. Batteux and his system are in fact criticized — or ignored — to a far greater degree than one might assume from Kristeller’s article. 29 Such language about being ‘ taken for granted ’ begs huge questions. While the terms beaux arts or fi ne arts and the list of fi ve (or so) associated arts are passed on, in what sense do they get passed on as a system? Or are they merely a list? Kristeller’s caveats, in the guise of assumptions, give pause passim : ‘ Without ever giving a defi nite system , [Addison] constantly refers to gardening and architecture [neither of which comprised elements in Batteux’s original system of beaux arts in their pure form, according to Kristeller], painting and sculpture, poetry and music ’ (p. 208; emphasis added). Further, English writers during the second half of the eighteenth century ‘ were not so much interested in expounding and developing a system of the fi ne arts, which they took pretty much for granted , as in discussing general concepts and principles ’ (p. 211; emphasis added).
There are two issues here. First is the question whether the ‘ system ’ of fi ne arts ever stabilized as an agreed-upon entity as such and in a universally acknowledged form, as Kristeller claims it did. 30 On the contrary, it looks as if there was in fact no canonical ‘ nucleus ’ , but only a loosely defi ned and ever-changing grab-bag of items that fell under the newly discovered rubric of ‘ fi ne arts ’ during this era (as is often the case with such grand rubrics). Kristeller says as much in his more candid moments, as with the case with Addison above. 31 Second is the question whether this so-called systematization had any bearing on the rise of aesthetic enquiry in the eighteenth century in the form attributed to this enquiry by Kristeller. Consider another pivotal example, in which both questions come together graphically and dramatically. It is astonishing to learn how, when architecture is eventually added to the list of fi ne arts by D’Alembert in 1751, ‘ the last irregularity which had separated Batteux’s system from the modern scheme of the fi ne arts ’ is fi nally ‘ removed ’ . 32 What Kristeller suppresses here are two signifi cant details: fi rst, D’Alembert added to Batteux’s list not only architecture, but also engraving ; second, this addition yielded six fi ne arts, with fi ve apparently subordinated to poetry. Do we have here one art comprised of fi ve subspecies, or six arts arranged in some curious hierarchy (see Figure 1 )? Both answers seem to be correct. In his ‘ Discours Préliminaire ’ (vol. 1, pp. xvii – xviii), D’Alembert clarifi es that poetry means ‘ making ’ ( ‘ la Poésie [understood in its ‘ natural (i.e. Greek) sense ’ ] n’est autre chose que l’invention ou création ’ ), while the tree of knowledge maps out different subdomains of the poetic (literary) art, which then stand in an awkward relation to the non-literary arts (the latter separated off by a horizontal bar, but grouped together as a single set). Either way, the numbers do not add up. The schematization is hardly as neat as Kristeller would like it to be. And it is as unlike its predecessor (Batteux’s) as it is unlike any of its successors, some of whom would furnish a fl at list of fi ne arts that sometimes did include engraving, but not always. 33 Yet, Kristeller insists that the E ncyclopedia ‘ furnished the fi nal touch ’ to ‘ Batteux’s system of the fi ne arts ’ . 34 The problem hardly ends here, though. Once we examine the total context of the arts in D’Alembert’s overall system, it becomes apparent that their layout, far from supporting Kristeller’s thesis, 35 actually demonstrates the opposite: the beaux arts are rigorously demarcated from ‘ Reason ’ and ‘ Philosophy ’ , which category in turn makes no provisions whatsoever for aesthetics . Which brings us back to the question whether the so-called systematization of the arts had any bearing on the rise or formulation of aesthetic enquiry in the eighteenth century. In my view, Kristeller has failed to show any connection between these two historical occurrences. And this, too, is a point that Kristeller is willing to concede on occasion, as in the observation quoted earlier about the English, who ‘ were not so much interested in expounding and developing a system of the fi ne arts ’ as they were interested in developing principles of aesthetics. The same point can be reiterated for every major milestone in the history of aesthetic philosophy, be it Hutcheson, Baumgarten, Hume, Burke, Diderot, D’Alembert, Kant, or Hegel, to name just these. Either there is no connection to be found between the modern system of the arts and modern aesthetic theory, or none has been demonstrated, or else ‘ the system ’ of the fi ne arts, in some singular and defi nitive sense, never existed except as a fi gment of Kristeller’s historical imagination.
There is no reason to deny that the concept of fi ne art existed or that it arose sometime around the turn of the eighteenth century. That it ever attained the dignity of a system is disputable. That the concept, let alone its so-called systematization, was (or is) a prerequisite to the emergence of aesthetic theory and the discipline of aesthetics, is an unnecessary assumption. Worse, it is a case of post hoc ordering mistaken for causality not least if it can be shown, as I believe it can (nor am I alone), that the ancient Greeks were operating with a concept of aesthetics of their own, one that is recognizable to us today. Historically, Kristeller’s account seems not to hold up. To make matters worse, it suffers from a series of confl ations and simplifi cations. The argument slides along a chain of non sequiturs , which it pretends to treat as historical consequents, from ‘ system of fi ne arts ’ to ‘ fi ne arts ’ to ‘ fi ne art ’ to ‘ art ’ (or ‘ Art ’ , p. 164) to ‘ (the) aesthetic ’ (understood as the autonomy of art from moral and other spheres). At the end of the line, all the terms turn out to have been interchangeable with one another, which makes discerning what is being meant at any single moment a treacherous affair (classical references, as in ‘ ancient works of art ’ , are a case in point, and we will want to come back to these problematic formulations below). Nevertheless, there are still stronger reasons telling against Kristeller than his apparent failure to grab hold of the eighteenth century at the moment of its ‘ decisive step ’ en route to the so-called modern system of the arts.
The Incoherence of Aesthetic Autonomy, Strictly Conceived Historical arguments aside, a clean break between aesthetic qualities and the rest (intellectual, moral, religious, and practical function or content) is difficult to maintain in any context, a point that has been repeatedly made from Dewey to Eagleton to any number of contemporary philosophers of art. Indeed, the very assertion of this kind of break is itself typically the sign of some sort of ideological or other non-aesthetic pressure that is being brought to bear. 36 Hutcheson, Hume, and Kant — three figures named by Kristeller in connection with the purported separation of beauty from morals — in fact establish the opposite of Kristeller’s point: all three sought a common grounding of aesthetics and morals in the more basic domain of human sensibility (the sensus communis ). The mere admission of causality as a source of beauty (or aesthetic value), which can be found in both Hutcheson ( Inquiry , Treatise I, Section V, § XIX) and Aristotle (P oetics , p assim ), though not quite in Kant, already reveals how (apparently) morally neutral and autonomous aesthetic values can disguise moral and other values (here, rationality, as a prerequisite of a moral subject). Normative stipulations about aesthetic pleasure are not innocent: they also make normative stipulations about the nature of the human mind. Thus, Francis Hutcheson, in An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue (1725), holds that beauty’s utility and its moral value lie in its capacity to help focus the mind. 37 For ‘ what stands revealed to the mind in this state is the world’s rational and “ Benevolent Design ” ’ , which ‘ gives [the beholder] the Pleasures of Beauty ’ . 38 The same can be said about Shaftesbury, who has a fair claim to having founded modern aesthetics in the first decade of the eighteenth century.
But if so, then he did so on the premise that morals and aesthetics are nearly ‘ indistinguishable ’ . 39 Even Baumgarten’s science of aesthetics was premised on the underlying notion of a ‘ sensate cognition of things ’ and the progressive guiding of ‘ sensate discourse to perfection ’ . 40 For the same reasons, normative stipulations are a far cry from supporting claims about aesthetic autonomy, which are probably incoherent in any event, though aesthetic autonomy — in effect, pure self-reference — is what Kristeller would have the modern closed circuit of the arts achieve. On the other hand, the idea that the discipline of aesthetics might enjoy autonomy is defensible if it is taken to mean that it sets its own criteria in its own domain. But this is quite different from a vaguer notion of aesthetic autonomy as applied to objects and experiences. 41 Complete autonomy cannot be even imagined, for what would it mean? Even the negation of relation to a given sphere (culture, religion, morals) involves a necessary entanglement in what is being refused. The fatwa issued against Salman Rushdie in 1989 for his Satanic Verses tragically showed how inseverable these connections are, though one need not resort to so freighted an example as this to fi nd the same principle being put into action elsewhere. Many of the most sophisticated theories of art on offer today deliberately look for analogies and convergences between aesthetic and ethical forms of refl ection without compromising either — for instance, those of Kendall Walton, Elaine Scarry, or Susan Stewart, in addition to others to be invoked below. 42 Kristeller seems to be chasing a chimera.
Aesthetic autonomy is a chimera that has held a powerful sway over the modern imagination nonetheless, and it reappears whenever anyone pursues, say, the separation of art from life or the separation of form from content. In fact, Kristeller’s own view about the unquestioned dominance of aesthetic autonomy since the eighteenth century may owe as much to a movement he repudiates as it does to Kant, whose formalism inspired that movement: aestheticism. Kristeller’s problem is that he cannot point to a moment when the modern system of the arts and its corresponding stabilization of the aesthetic ever quite takes hold. Not even Kant provides a good purchase for Kristeller’s purposes. His third Critique , T he Critique of Judgment , is least of all a ‘ theory of beauty a nd the arts ’ (p. 223; emphasis added). Kant famously scants the arts in his treatise, which constitutes a theory of nature, and ultimately a theory of mind. And as soon as the aesthetic (never) does take hold on Kristeller’s story, it crumbles away again. Thus, once we enter into the nineteenth century, the traditional system of the fine arts begins to show signs of disintegration. Since the latter part of the nineteenth century, painting has moved further away from literature than at any previous time, whereas music has at times moved closer to it, and the crafts have taken great strides to recover their earlier standing as decorative arts. . . . The excesses of aestheticism have led to a healthy reaction which is yet far from universal. The tendency among some contemporary philosophers to consider Art and the aesthetic realm as a pervasive aspect of human experience rather than as the specific domain of the conventional fine arts also goes a long way to weaken the latter notion in its traditional form. ( ‘ Modern System of the Arts ’ , p. 226) Whether or not any of these claims about the relations among the arts is true (and it seems to me that they are all questionable), one has to wonder whether the epithets traditional and conventional have really been earned. Part of the problem is that Kristeller is confl ating ‘ the modern system of the arts ’ with claims to aesthetic autonomy. Again, while no one would doubt that the concept of the fi ne arts exists in the mind of some, the existence of a ‘ system ’ of the arts and its relationship to aesthetic autonomy — about which ‘ all writers and all thinkers seem to agree ’ (p. 165) — remains highly doubtful (despite Kristeller’s assurances to the contrary). The presence of a system is no guarantee that claims on behalf of the autonomy of art will be made (witness Batteux), just as claims for aesthetic autonomy do not have to be premised on art at all, let alone its classification (witness Kant). To take two further examples, the common-sense philosopher from Scotland, Thomas Reid (1710 – 1796), daringly found beauty to be ‘ common to the thought of a mind, . . . the form of a piece of matter, to an abstract theorem, and a stroke of wit ’ , insofar as pleasure is tied, universally, to the contemplation of excellence of all kinds. Hence, ‘ there are beauties of speech and beauties of thought; beauties in the arts, and in the sciences ’ . 43 (Elsewhere he adds ‘ moral and intellectual qualities ’ to the list. 44 ) Reid also had a working concept of the fine arts, but made little use of it in the same work. He had, in other words, a well-developed view of aesthetics, but was uninterested in either the autonomy of art or of aesthetics on the one hand, or the question of the fi ne arts on the other. Then there is Hegel, whose lectures on aesthetics are superfi cially organized around a system of fi ve arts. But this is hardly those lectures ’ outstanding mark of distinction (the arts exhibit progressive stages of ‘ spiritualization ’ ), nor does this organizing device serve aesthetic autonomy: Hegel’s system is designed to illustrate the vicissitudes and eventual supremacy of Spirit alone (and, to be sure, the capacity of Hegel’s system to absorb a cliché of the contemporary art world).
Kristeller’s account trades on a further confusion, which makes it all the more frustrating to pin down. While his essay offers itself as a straightforward descriptive and historical account (and has widely been so received), it remains emphatically partial to aesthetic autonomy in its modern form, inasmuch as it stresses that the progress of the arts involved their steady ‘ emancipation ’ from their background contexts, which is to say, their becoming autonomous from religion, morality, and other strictures, as well as from one another the way ‘ instrumental music’ was emancipated ‘ from poetry’ in antiquity, or the way ‘ the three visual arts ’ became emancipated from ‘ the crafts ’ in the Renaissance, or the way the natural sciences became ‘ emancipated ’ from other areas of thought in the eighteenth century, ‘ thus prepar[ing] the way for a clearer separation between the arts and sciences ’ (pp.
169, 183, 225). These are all presented by Kristeller as positive developments, as is the grouping together of the arts into an autonomous systematic unity, which encouraged theoretical refl ection on art in the form of aesthetic philosophy proper — a privilege that was unknown to, indeed unthinkable in, antiquity, which instead struggled at ‘ attempts at a classifi cation of the more important human arts and sciences ’ (p. 172). This is how the essay unfolds, in virtually Hegelian, forced-march fashion, until the fi nal two pages. 45 Then, suddenly, a note of relaxed historical relativism intrudes, which contradicts the urgently linear tone of the sixty-odd preceding pages: times change, arts present a ‘ moving picture ’ , their distinctions are ‘ arbitrary ’ , their hierarchies ‘ rise and decline ’ (pp. 226 – 227). And in the last sentence from the long quotation above, in which ‘ the tendency among some contemporary philosophers to consider Art and the aesthetic realm as a pervasive aspect of human experience ’ is singled out, Kristeller footnotes the source of the idea he is paraphrasing here: John Dewey’s landmark book Art as Experience (1934), which is in some ways a direct heir to Kant, and in others an exponent of a vitalist tradition that has immediate roots in nineteenth-century German philosophy.
Dewey’s book articulates a view that undoes the whole of what Kristeller’s history of aesthetics has narrated up to this point: namely, that aesthetics denominates an element of human experience that is ill-captured by individual art forms (a point made repeatedly by Dewey), and, indeed, by the domain of art generally. For, as Dewey writes, ‘ If art is an intrinsic quality of activity, we cannot divide and subdivide it. ’ 46 Moreover, art as an experience is, for Dewey, indivisible from all other forms of activity and experience. 47 Dewey makes it quite clear that art and experience lie on a continuum that is organic he suggestively calls this continuum ‘ the stream of living ’ — and that renders distinctions between common experience and aesthetic experience fruitless (p. 7). The very idea of ‘ the fi ne arts ’ is, consequently, anathema to Dewey’s theory of art. Indeed, his book is a sustained attack on the notion, from its fi rst pages to the last. There are no ‘ fi ne ’ arts that can be cut off as an autonomous domain from the utilitarian arts, let alone from daily life. 48 The view that they can is the product of a capitalist culture in the service of nationalism and militarism (his terms) and of a museum culture in the service of all three (pp. 6 – 8). ‘ The forces that have glorifi ed fi ne art by setting it upon a far-off pedestal did not arise within the realm of art nor is their infl uence confi ned to the arts ’ (p. 6). The criticism is a good one, and for two reasons: it recontextualizes the very premise of the fi ne arts, which Dewey’s theory insists must be seen as radically embedded (his term again) in the processes of society, life, and history (p. 10); and it democratizes art as an experience that is available to anyone and virtually everywhere. Thus, Dewey insists — echoing, to a surprising degree, Thomas Reid — that art can be found in the work of the intelligent mechanic, in the ‘ casting and playing ’ of an angler seeking fi sh, in the experience of a thought, in all ‘ qualities of sense, those of touch and taste as well as of sight and hearing ’ , in actions considered as completing processes and experiences, and in ‘ any impulsion toward organization of material ’ . Indeed, ‘ any practical activity will . . . have esthetic quality ’ . 49 Dewey is even prepared to entertain what Kristeller will deny, namely that the Greeks were capable of ‘ fram[ing] a generalized conception of art ’ (p. 25). Small wonder that Kristeller should have seemed puzzled by Dewey’s theory and all that this theory represents. Dewey’s book is a refutation avant la lettre of Kristeller’s entire thesis, which it completely anticipates and even renders obsolete by two decades.
Glossing Dewey and his contemporaries (whoever these may have been), Kristeller comments: All these ideas [about the uncertain boundaries between art and non-art, and between art and experience] are still fl uid and ill defi ned, and it is diffi cult to see how far they will go in modifying or undermining the traditional status of the fi ne arts and of aesthetics. (p. 227)

Traditional or modern — or illusory? Kristeller appears to have come full circle, and to have returned us to a premodern lack of defi nition — in Greenberg’s terms, ‘ confusion ’ .
Dewey’s theory of aesthetics points to changes that Kristeller’s vision cannot even anticipate: ‘ these contemporary changes ’ , Kristeller continues, ‘ may help to free us from certain conventional preconceptions and to clarify our ideas on the present status and future prospects of the arts and of aesthetics ’ , as well as a better understanding of their ‘ historical origins ’ . But Dewey is not predicting changes in art or its prospects; he is offering a changed view of what art is , one that would apply as much to the past as it does to the present, which is to say, one that would change our descriptive historical accounts of the past.
Had Kristeller grasped the full import of Dewey’s aesthetics, it is doubtful that he would have ever written the essay he did. Even if he did not agree with Dewey’s aesthetic philosophy completely, he would at least have been obliged to recognize either that the system he describes was a historical construct of his own making, or else that the notion of the fi ne arts grouped loosely together was an ideological illusion entertained by some but not all historical agents over the centuries, but in any case a notion that was untrue, indeed incoherent, when examined in any detail. He would, in other words, have been obliged to take a more critical view of the guiding concept of his essay from start to fi nish. In the process, he might have realized that aesthetic theories have fl ourished independently of the concept of fi ne art. And, by the same token, the ancients would not have appeared to him hobbled in comparison to the moderns. On the contrary, they would have seemed more advanced in some respects, and at the very least pioneering and enlightened. Alas, this is not how Kristeller chose to read Dewey, or the ancients, or the moderns. 50 The Ancient System of the Arts Dewey puts into relief the problem that art may have no determinable boundaries today — no specifi city and no essence — and that it may never have had any in antiquity, or in the Renaissance, or in early modernity either. What may have changed since antiquity are not the boundaries that delimit art, but the spheres of activity that fail to do so cleanly. The question is of capital importance. It affects how we can claim to know and understand a culture from the remote past. Consider the following: As Richard Gordon has argued at length, the later [i.e. modern] associations of the word ‘ art ’ and ‘ artist ’ are inappropriate for the pots and potters who provide most of the source material for Greek imagery. The general term ‘ art ’ also tends to obscure the very different frames in which the images of Greek culture occur. It may be of major importance — even for ‘ identifi cation ’ — whether an image is found on a temple — public, state-funded, religious display — or on a cup designed for the male world of private drinking parties; or on a perfume fl ask for male or female use. How images are framed affects recognition. There is a danger in using the general word ‘ art ’ in that signifi cant nuances of contextualization may be effaced.
So warns the introduction to a recent collection of essays entitled — on its own terms, dangerously — Art [ sic ] and Text in Ancient Greek Culture . 51 The point is Kristellerian again, as a glance back at the fi rst of the quotations from Kristeller’s essay above will show: both positions hold that a separation of the arts in antiquity is impossible to conceive on our current understanding of art, so much so that the term art risks misleading us into a false identifi cation of the nature of ancient aesthetic production altogether. Is it really the case that the ancients had no conception of art comparable to ours? 52 Can we ever hope to approach their art on its own terms? Or worse still, in order to gain access to ancient culture, must we abandon all hope of approaching it through what we used to call its art? Putting the problem in this way may lead to unwarranted desperation, and probably (as I suggested) to an overinfl ated estimation of the autonomy of art and aesthetics today.
And yet, Kristellerians paradoxically go on talking about pre-modern ‘ art ’ as though nothing had fundamentally changed after the eighteenth century. And Kristeller does so himself, whether unwittingly or out of refl ex habit or else out of some other unspecifi ed motive that we need not speculate about. There is something peculiar about the following, which I quoted towards the beginning of this essay: ‘ ancient writers and thinkers, though confronted with excellent works of art and quite susceptible to their charm, were neither able nor eager to detach the aesthetic quality of these works of art ’ (p. 174). One can only suspect that the term art here is both an abbreviation for ‘ fi ne art ’ (as on the same page, where we fi nd this expansion, and at p. 168, where the phrase is rightly put in scare quotes) and an anachronism. For whose criteria are being used here to assign the label of (fi ne) ‘ art ’ , let alone ‘ aesthetic quality ’ or ‘ excellent ’ ? Surely these are modern, retrospective judgements, and illicit ones at that, as they all rest on a presumption about (purely) aesthetic judgement that is being denied to the ancients themselves. Indeed, on Kristeller’s view, autonomous aesthetic judgement is possible only after the eighteenth century. Similarly, when we read (p. 226), ‘ The various arts are certainly as old as human civilization, but the manner in which we are accustomed to group them and to assign them a place in our scheme of life and of culture is comparatively recent ’ , this clouds the issue. The assumption that classifi cation does not defi ne the arts in a fundamentally new way is highly disputable. But then again, as I have been trying to argue, classifi catory schemes may not be the most fruitful criteria for defi ning aesthetic thought, let alone predictors of aesthetic autonomy. 53 More interesting than the problem of how we might discover the proper autonomy of the arts is the problem of how we can discover their properly embedded contexts and interrelations in any age. 54 Refl ecting on the nature of ancient aesthetics can, I believe, show us a way forward, even as it will lead to other, more challenging problems.
While it is true that the contexts that confi gured and circumscribed the uses of art in antiquity remind us that art is always embedded in cultural and social practices, it is also true that practices do not obtain except insofar as they are experienced. And qua experienced, they carry aesthetic features that are susceptible to analysis, in ways that are at least as meaningful as the analysis of art cut off from these features. Indeed, the pleasure one takes in these experiences as experiences by itself constitutes a fi rst and indispensable level of analysis. Such a pleasure, being refl ective of aesthetic value, is an aesthetic experience. 55 It is for this reason that aesthetic questions are, I believe, our best bet for gaining access to the problems of art in antiquity — not because art is the ultimate resting point for such an enquiry, but because it represents a relay to something else: it is a window onto modes of sensory experience, onto modes of attention generally, onto perceptual habits and cognitive styles, and, therefore, onto the social relations that are embedded in things. For as Michael Baxandall and others have so well shown, the arts are ‘ deposits of social relationships ’ , as are, indeed, the worlds inhabited by the senses. 56 To view art in this way is to view it as an aesthetic phenomenon of the richest kind imaginable.
By attending to aesthetic questions in antiquity, to the way in which the world was perceived, sensed, and grasped — not in some unmediated way, but always thanks to the conditioning fi lters of a given culture and its historical features — we can reach into the very foundations of the problems of meaning and value in antiquity. Aesthetics, narrowly conceived, opens onto aesthetics more broadly conceived. Indeed, it is doubtful that access to the one (art and aesthetic experience) can be gained in the absence of the other (sensation and perception).
That is why the most productive, if least explored, way of confronting the problems of art and aesthetic refl ection in antiquity is not by addressing this or that medium or literary or art criticism proper, but by transcending the barriers between the various art forms and their contemplation or analysis in order to arrive at what they share in common. In doing so, what one is acknowledging is that arts are genres of experience , while at the same time we are expanding our conception of what may be referred to as the (ever-changing and everadapting) aesthetic public sphere of antiquity in which the various art forms mingled freely and their vocabularies were shared. This kind of approach shares more, perhaps, with Greenberg than with Kristeller, though it is not a stranger to the spirit of Batteux either.
For what Batteux was looking for was ultimately a shared common principle that cut across the various art forms in his day. He found it in imitation. Dewey and others found it in experience, which I believe is a more promising avenue to take. And while it would be a fantasy to imagine we could ever recover, in some direct and unmediated way, the original experience of the ancients, neither should this be the goal. Sensations, the foundations of aesthetic experience, are not only highly subjective; they are also socially shared objects of communication — the very opposite of private and internal states of affairs. For this reason, sensations when they appear to agents (or subjects) are not direct empirical imprints of some outer material reality. They are prismatic refl ections of the languages of sensation whose acquisition is a prerequisite to social life. Such structures of thought are deeply embedded, in ways and in places that refl ect some of the most urgent questions of meaning and value available to the ancient societies — most often, in the discourses of experience that survive. It is here that we can go about reconstructing ancient aesthetics from a fresh angle. The very presence of the term aesthetics in our vocabulary today is an appeal to this commonality. But its absence from the ancient vocabulary in the modern sense is not an argument against seeking out its earliest impulses, which also happen to be our own. 57 James I. Porter University of California, Irvine jiporter@uci.edu
