# Introduction: Mousikē, not Music
by Penelope Murray and Peter Wilson

'Music and the Muses: the culture of Mousikē in the classical Athenian city': our title is designed to show that this is not a book about music in the modern sense, but about Mousikē, that union of song, dance, and word to which the Muses gave their name. Mousikē, the realm of the Muses, lies at the very heart of Greek culture, and is indeed a contender for the closest term in Greek to our (polymorphous) 'culture'. Yet it is a subject which has largely been approached in a fragmentary, atomistic manner or confined to abstruse specialisms and antiquarian attempts at reconstruction.

In its commonest form, Mousikē represented for the Greeks a seamless complex of instrumental music, poetic word, and co-ordinated physical movement. As such it encompassed a vast array of performances, from small-scale entertainment in the private home to elaborate festivals in which an entire polis was involved. Mousikēé was an endlessly variegated, rich set of cultural practices, with strongly marked regional traditions that made them a valuable item of local self-definition as well as a means for exchange and interaction. It also displays a markedly self-reflective element, a concomitant discourse about those practices: thus heroes, gods, and narratives of Mousikē always loomed large in the realm of myth, that most malleable form of Greek creative and reflective discourse.<sup><a name="fni1" href="#fn1">1</a></sup> And it may well have been the very first area of Greek cultural practice that produced more or less systematic descriptive and explanatory accounts of itself: μονσικη seems to be the first of the 'tekhnai' nouns formed in -ικη, reflecting its early conceptualization as a craft with established practices and principles. In short, musical 'theory' was apparently born with mousikē itself, and the persistent scholarly habit of locating its beginnings rather in the Hellenistic period (and in particular with the activities of Aristoxenos of Tarentum) reflects a narrow view of what counts as musical thinking.<sup><a name="fni2" href="#fn2">2</a></sup>

Mousikē shaped the way individuals and communities lived and sought to reproduce themselves. It was a medium through which ideals of behaviour were developed and enforced-the morality of individuals and collectives, notions of proper or ideal corporeal types, political principles and pragmatics. Consider for instance the way the Arkadians sought actively to mould their national character by means of Mousikē, fixing it at the heart of their political life (εἰς τὴν ὅλην πολιτείαν τὴν μουσικὴν παραλαβεῖν Polyb. 4.20.7) Their state-funded programme of socialization on a grand scale included musical training for males until the age of thirty, demanding instruction and demonstration in instrumental performance and dance as well as vocal expertise.<sup><a name="fni3" href="#fn3">3</a></sup> The centrality of Mousikē to Greek notions and practices of paideia demonstrated by the Arkadians is reflected at the theoretical level by Plato's use of Mousikē in the Laws, where the ideal city is effectively to be sung and danced into existence.

Mousikē was also a vital medium through which societies created and related to their past: one need only point to the absolutely central position occupied by the aetiological reflex in musical myth and performance, or simply to the parentage accorded the Muses themselves by the Greeks, daughters of Zeus and Memory (Mnēmosynē).<sup><a name="fni4" href="#fn4">4</a></sup>

Such parentage for those who look over the realm of Mousikē betokens not only total and privileged access to the past. It also registers the fact of Mousikē's enormous power in the world of men. <sup><a name="fni5" href="#fn5">5</a></sup> The victory song-dance performed by a khoros (the epinikion)-one of the artistic peaks of late archaic Mousikē-could serve the colonial and military aspirations of city-states as much as it served to praise the athletic achievements of its commissioners.<sup><a name="fni6" href="#fn6">6</a></sup> If we are to believe their own publicity, in the earlier period masters of this divine medium consorted with kings and tyrants on something approaching an equal footing: the great war-lord of classical western Greece, Hieron of Syracuse, engaged Pindar, Bakkhylides, and Aiskhylos in an orgy of Mousikē designed (among other things) to beautify the brutality of his activities, which included ethnic cleansing and forced migration on a grand scale.<sup><a name="fni7" href="#fn7">7</a></sup> Even so, the poet could mobilize the power of Mousikē to act as a control on the megalomaniac: 'no lyres in banquet halls welcome him [viz the bad tyrant] in gentle fellowship with boys' voices' (Ol. 1.97-8). And this prestige and social power of mousikoi did not wither away with the classical period, as is sometimes supposed. It is becoming increasingly clear that analogous negotiations of power continued throughout the hellenistic and later periods between generals, kings, and emperors on the one hand and those canny musicians, event-organizers, and image-makers who formed themselves into powerful associations and operated on a wide international scenethe Dionyvsiac Artists.

To delimit the potentially vast terrain for the exploration of Mousikē we have focused mainly on classical Athens. This choice of time and place is not simply determined by the fact that it is for Athens that a (relative) abundance of evidence survives. It is rather driven by a recognition of the special, and in many ways unusual, place that Mousikē occupied there. Famous for its elaborate festival calendar with its numerous agonistic events, this city provided itself and its many visitors with a more extended range of 'musical' activities than any other. Yet classical Athens also developed its musical culture in directions not apparently taken elsewhere in Greece. This distinctiveness can productively be related to its political (and social) culture of democracy, to its massive size and to its unique position within the wider Aigean world.<sup><a name="fni8" href="#fn8">8</a></sup> The fact that Athens became the dominating centre of performance over the course of the fifth century, a place to which poets, musicians, actors, and spectators from all over and beyond the Greek world gravitated, also made of it a place of vibrant critical reflection and exchange, where the theoretical analysis of mousikē flourished in an intellectually heterogeneous environment, alongside and in active competition with other trends of social and philosophical thought.<sup><a name="fni9" href="#fn9">9</a></sup> This culture of criticism also took place at the primary level of performance, for the strong thread of selfawareness and reflection on its contexts of production and social effects that characterizes all periods of Greek poetic culture was especially virulent in the musical culture of Athens.

Mousikē is also at the heart of Greek religion. Not only was this terrain the province of a special and in many ways mysterious group of divinities, the Mousai themselves, but the practices of Mousikē were also a significant-indeed crucial-component of worship: from the simple instrumental music that accompanied every sacrifice (cf. Hdt. 1.132.4) to hymns of greater or lesser complexity, to elaborate choral performances (paeans, dithyrambs, prosodia, partheneia, and so on) and the hyper-sophistication of comic and tragic drama for Dionysos. The deeply musical and performative dimension of Greek religion has rarely been analysed in its own right. It is a recurrent theme of this volume, and the central concern of its first set of chapters (Part I; see also Stehle.)

Mousikē further encompassed a large part of what we would call Greek 'education', or more broadly, socialization (paideia). As our glance at the self-improving Arkadians shows, the words of the poets were routinely regarded as containing the ethical and moral material suitable for the formation of citizens as individuals and collectives. So too were the particular tunes and rhythms used to deliver them. All these were absorbed in contexts of performance. The fissures that seemed to be opening up in Athenian society in the last third of the fifth century-under pressure of rapid social and political change, the intellectual revolution centred in the city and the escalating effects of the claustrophobic conditions of warfamously found one of their clearest expressions in terms of 'old' and 'new' visions of paideia, and of mousikē as a core element of paideia. The ethical and educational aspects of Athenian mousikē and its moment of major crisis-are another central concern of this book (Part IV).

Paideia and the political sphere are never far apart, and one of the core aims of this volume is to explore the relations between Mousikē and politics in Athens. This was a society of which Plato could allege that a 'democratization' of musical practice had actually led to the increase of democratic liberty (Laws 701a-b), and in which a leading theorist of mousikē, a friend and adviser of the most poweful man in the city, was ostracized for his musico-political activities (as Wallace argues here). A fascinating but curiously neglected area of Athenian Mousikē, in which major issues of intellectual, political, and social debate interweave, receives serious treatment in this volume for the first time (from Csapo; see also Barker and Wilson)-the so-called 'New Musical Revolution'. This complex set of developments, at the level of musical practice, instrumental and economic resource, and performance conditions, generated immensely heated interventions from partisans and critics alike. And yet no comprehensive study of its profoundly ideologized character and sociological significance has hitherto been attempted. It is possible to read the major works on Greek music, as well as much of the current scholarship on the 'new musicians' themselves, without being required seriously to engage with the question of what made this musical revolution so threatening, exciting and important-as if (to use the apt comparison made by Simon Goldhill)-the phenomenon of rock and roll was best approached through the tuning of the bass guitar; or as though the violence that erupted at the premiere of Stravinsky's and Nyinsky's Le Sacre du printemps on 29 May 1913 should be explained by reference to its scoring alone.<sup><a name="fni10" href="#fn10">10</a></sup>

Without any doubt the most conspicuous and idiosyncratic feature of the musical culture of Athens is its development and promotion of drama, especially tragedy. Drama has benefited most from recent developments in the study of Greek literature as performance rather than literary text, and from the excavation of its original contexts as, effectively, a prize manifestation of Mousikē on a grand scale.<sup><a name="fni11" href="#fn11">11</a></sup> This volume builds on these developments (Part 11, see also Csapo), but we also aim to bring to greater prominence a number of other performance-types that took place in the city alongside drama (see especially Rutherford on the theoric Ahoros, Ceccarelli on pyrrhic dance), and so to see drama as one-hugely important-element on a highly variegated musical topography.

Despite its centrality, few studies have approached Mousikē in the manner proposed here. Italian scholarship, with its strong roots in cultural materialism, has led the way in the sort of integrated cultural analysis espoused: the work of Gentili, Pretagostini, Comotti, and Ross: stands out in particular; and there is evidently a younger generation continuing the tradition.<sup><a name="fni12" href="#fn12">12</a></sup> Claude Calame's magisterial Les Cheeurs de jeunes filles en Grece archaique (1977) pioneered a fully integrated approach to Mousikē, especially of choral Mousikē. It also remains the most important study of Sparta as a musical society, and as such serves as a valuable foil to our focus on Athens. Two important volumes of anglophone scholarship are Eva Stehle's exemplary Performance and Gender in Ancient Greece of 1997 and Performance Culture and Athenian Democracy edited by Goldhill and Osborne in 1999, though the latter adopts the more malleable modern concept of 'performance' as its guiding focus and so extends well beyond the orbit of Mousikē. What the anglophone tradition has above all contributed are fundamental works devoted to the sources and history of Greek music.<sup><a name="fni13" href="#fn13">13</a></sup> In addition to providing the basic materials and framework for all subsequent study of ancient music, these also tackle some of the more daunting aspects of musical theory and technical matters of instrumentation and practice. In addition to these fundamental works there is a solid and growing body of documentary resources for broadening the study of Mousikē into new areas. Stephanis's exhaustive prosopography of theatrical and other performers, ΔΙΟΝΤΣΦΙΑΚΟΙ ΤΕΧΝΙΤΙΑΙ (1988), is an invaluable work of reference that will greatly assist the sociological study of ancient performers and performances. And more recently Brigitte Le Guen has made available the difficult corpus of (largely inscriptional) evidence relating to the activities οἱ the Associations of Dionysiac Artists (οἱ περὶ τὸν Διόνυσον τεχνῖται) in her magisterial Les Associations de technites dionysiaques a Pepoque hellenistique (2001).<sup><a name="fni14" href="#fn14">14</a></sup>

The tendency towards atomization in the study of Mousikē has, however, been tenacious. It is of course largely the fact of our being irrevocably sundered from the acoustic worlds of the past that has encouraged the continued divorce in our studies of the poetic word-as 'literature' -from its original music, the latter being consigned to the rather recondite worlds of musicology and reconstruction.<sup><a name="fni15" href="#fn15">15</a></sup> Greek music in the modern sense of instrumental practice and scoring continues to be studied in curious isolation, largely ignored by all but expert musicologists and organologists. Another reason for this unhelpful divorce of music from Mousikē is to be found in the historical development of music in the post-Enlightenment western tradition, and in its concomitant academic study in musicology. It is only very recently that the discipline of musicology acquired a critical orientation, some decades later than most of the other human sciences. The effect has been to dislodge-rather late in the day-music's sovereign position in the (post-)Romantic imagination as that realm of art floating most freely above ideology, the expression of pure spirit and emotion. And it has shattered the mirage that music is little more than man's genius acting upon a phenomenon of the natural world. At last it too has been seen as a cultural system, an entirely human artificealbeit the one that disguises itself most brilliantly as nature. Music has been well described by one of the leading lights of this 'new musicology' as 'the ultimate hidden persuader' -but that is a discovery that would have come as small news indeed to men like Plato, Damon, and Aristophanes.<sup><a name="fni16" href="#fn16">16</a></sup>

Of all the elements of Mousikē, dance has until recently doubtless fared worst, remaining a largely antiquarian interest on the margins of classical studies, at best subjected to highly speculative and often ill-considered attempts at 'reconstruction'. Many of our contributors advance the study of this fascinating and ill-served subject, and Ceccarelli and Wohl tackle it directly, from complementary angles: Ceccarelli brings a wealth of detail and contextual evidence to the Athenian manifestation of one of the major forms of Greek dance, the pyrrhikhéor warrior dance, while Wohl follows the path of more philosophical reflection on Mousikē offered by Xenophon's Symposion and its figure of the dancing philosopher.<sup><a name="fni17" href="#fn17">17</a></sup>

1. <a name="fn1">&nbsp;</a>On musical myth see e.g. Abert (1910); Restani (1995) with further bibliography cited there; Landels (1999) 148-62; Castaldo (2000) from an iconographical perspective.<a href="#fni1">&#8617;</a>
2. <a name="fn2">&nbsp;</a>Mathicsen (1999) ch. 4 is a recent example of this habit.<a href="#fni2">&#8617;</a>
3. <a name="fn3">&nbsp;</a>Polyb. 4.20-1. The functional interpretation is that of Polybios himself, who as a Megalopolitan almost certainly experienced it at first hand. See Visconti (1999) 68-73; Stehle (1997) 66; Kowalzig in this volume.<a href="#fni3">&#8617;</a>
4. <a name="fn4">&nbsp;</a>Hes. Theog. 54-71. See Barker (1994); also Vernant (1965) ch. 3.<a href="#fni4">&#8617;</a>
5. <a name="fn5">&nbsp;</a>Note the hierarchy of power implied by the Homeric Hymn 25 (Muses, Apollo): aovidoi and kitharistai derive their wordly (επι χθονι) authority from the Muses and Apollo, while kings receive theirs from Zeus.<a href="#fni5">&#8617;</a>
6. <a name="fn6">&nbsp;</a>See Dougherty (1993); also Cole (1992); Hubbard (1992).<a href="#fni6">&#8617;</a>
7. <a name="fn7">&nbsp;</a>Known major commussions of Hicron: Bakkh. Epin. 4, fr. 20c, an enkomion, Pind. Pyth. 1, Pyth. 2, Pind. fr. 105a, a hyporkhema (possibly all for the chariotvictory at the Pythia of 470: Gentili et al. (1995) 43-7); Pind. O/. 1, Bakkh. Epin. 5 (for the horse-race at Olympia in 476); Bakkh. Epin. 3 (for the chariot-race at Olympia in 468). Others: Aiskhylos Aitnaias 'as an augury of prosperity for those who were uniting in the settlement of the city': Life of Aiskhylos; cf. Dougherty (1993) ch. 5; Pind. Pyth. 3 perhaps related to an unsuccessful entry at the Pythia of 474; Pind. frr. 124d-126; an enkomion; cf. also Pind. Nem. 1 and 9, for Hiecron's commander Khromios, in both cases crowned as 'Aitnaian' and so after and reflecting his appointment as governor of Aitna in 476. Luragh: (1994) 354-68.<a href="#fni7">&#8617;</a>
8. <a name="fn8">&nbsp;</a>See Goldhill and Osborne (1999); Boedeker and Raaflaub (1998); Csapo and Miller (1998); Musti (2000); Mosconi (2000); Csapo, Wallace, Wilson, and Rutherford in this volume.<a href="#fni8">&#8617;</a>
9. <a name="fn9">&nbsp;</a>See Wallace (1998); Ford (2002) ch. 8; Murray in this volume.<a href="#fni9">&#8617;</a>
10. <a name="fn10">&nbsp;</a>Goldhill (19995). Hordern (2002) shows the degree to which the social and ideological importance of a poet like Timotheos continues to escape literary critics.<a href="#fni10">&#8617;</a>
11. <a name="fn11">&nbsp;</a>A selection from a vast bibliography: Taplin (1977); Winkler (19900); Nagy (1990); Csapo and Slater (1995); Green (1994); Easterling (1997); Easterling and Hall (2002).<a href="#fni11">&#8617;</a>
12. <a name="fn12">&nbsp;</a>Gentili (1988); Gentili and Pretagostini (1988); Gentili and Perusino (1995); Comotti (1989a); Cassio, Musti. Ross: (2000). The latter includes work of younger Italian scholars; see also Ceccarelli (1998); Restani (1995).<a href="#fni12">&#8617;</a>
13. <a name="fn13">&nbsp;</a>Winnington-Ingram (1936); Barker (1984), (1989); West (19924); Anderson (1994); cf. also Landels (1999) and Mathiesen (1999) in the same tradition. Mention should also be made here of the work by A. Beélis.<a href="#fni13">&#8617;</a>
14. <a name="fn14">&nbsp;</a>An independent full-scale study of the tekhnitai is also promised by Anezin: see Aneziri (1997). A further desideratum would be a collection of the evidence for other musical associations and performances that brought the study of Poland (1909) up to date.<a href="#fni14">&#8617;</a>
15. <a name="fn15">&nbsp;</a>The early conceptual separation of literature from music deserves closer study. The sophists were of great importance in this regard: Brancacei (2001) 144; see also now Ford (2002) esp. 4.<a href="#fni15">&#8617;</a>
16. <a name="fn16">&nbsp;</a>Quotation from Cook (1998) 122. See also Cook and Everist (1999). Other recent works from musicology and related disciplines whose insights could serve to enrich the study of Greek mowusik? include Attali (1985); Kramer (1990); Martin (1995); Delaere (1995); Krims and Klumpenhouer (1998).<a href="#fni16">&#8617;</a>
17. <a name="fn17">&nbsp;</a>For encouraging signs that things are changing in the study of Greek dance see in particular Ceccarelli (1998); Nacrebout (1997); cf. Delavaud-Roux (1993a), (19935), (1995).<a href="#fni17">&#8617;</a>
