# Shadows of Empire: Colonial Discourse and Javanese Tales.  LAURIE J. SEARS. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996. xxi + 349 pp., illustrations, notes, glossary, bibliography, index.
BENJAMIN BRINNER  
University of California, Berkeley

In a wide-ranging discussion, Laurie Sears offers a fascinating interpretation of Javanese wayang (shadow play) as a theatrical form of greatly varying meaning and narrative content that has been manipulated for political ends. Sears sets out to debunk "the celebration of wayang stories by European and American scholars as the essence of [...] Javanese religion—one example of colonial and postcolonial attempts to distance Javanese elites and peasants from Islam" (p. 286). She questions whether wayang "ever was the dominant expression of a Javanese philosophy, religion, or 'worldview'" (p. 11) and argues strongly for the embeddedness of wayang in Javanese political history. Not content to limit her focus to wayang performances, Sears examines the various discourses surrounding and impinging on wayang, along with the motives and relationships of the people who create and participate in these discourses. Thus she studies the "textual communities of patrons, performers and the scholars who study and, in the past, governed them" (p. 21). Central to Sears's political history of wayang is the premise that wayang reenacts power relations to negotiate how they will be recorded in memory.

Throughout the book's six chapters, Sears skillfully weaves together seemingly disparate historical and contemporary themes, constantly drawing connections and referring back to points made earlier in the text. Continued reference to variant tellings of a particular episode from the Indian-derived Ramayana cycle provides continuity. Some of the disparities between chapters derive from Sears's bifurcated research methodologies. She has worked as an ethnographer and as a historian, analyzing texts dating from the distant past to the 1990s. Her extensive fieldwork entailed interviews with numerous puppeteers and observation of hundreds of performances. This research underlies the project but is not foregrounded in the first few chapters where literary sources occupy much of Sears's argument. This style of representation is probably unavoidable to the extent that the project is historical, covering a sweep of centuries, while the fieldwork was, by necessity, slanted toward contemporary practice and beliefs, albeit with limited forays into the past through the memories of Sears's oldest interviewees. On the whole, the two approaches are mutually enriching.

In the first chapter, "Hearing Islamic Voices in Javanese Tales," Sears reaches back to the 17th century to explain how Islamic ideas and understandings interacted with shadow plays rooted in the Mahabharata and Ramayana narratives. In chapter 2, "Colonial Discourse and Javanese Shadow Theatre," she offers a discussion of the effects on wayang of the intertwined interests of Dutch scholars and colonial administrators who emphasized the supposed Indian heritage of Java while de-emphasizing and denigrating Islamic and indigenous Javanese elements. In these chapters, Sears relies heavily on the recent work of historians and literary scholars while drawing on numerous other scholars, including a panoply of writers from the Dutch colonial era. In so doing, she gives particular attention to distinctions and connections between myth and history. Sears contextualizes key Javanese and Dutch texts in their respective intellectual and political histories of the 19th and 20th centuries. In this section, extensive discussion of conflicting divisions of the wayang repertoire into trunk and branch stories may prove difficult for many readers.
In chapter 3, "Failed Narratives of the Nation or the New Essence of Java?," Sears discusses wayang as a tool used by Indonesian nationalists and liberal Dutch to draw the masses away from Islam. She devotes considerable attention to the founding of schools for wayang by the various royal courts. The relationship between written texts and oral performance is the subject of chapter 4, "Javanese Storytellers, Colonial Categories, Mahabharata Tales," where the distinction between trunk and branch stories resurfaces. Moving forward in time and foregrounding her fieldwork, Sears discusses three contrasting contemporary contexts for wayang performance in chapter 5, "Revolutionary Rhetoric and Postcolonial Performance Domains." These contexts differ radically and are all peripheral to the mainstream that has been the focus of most scholarly and popular writing. Nonetheless, these contexts are important parts of the contemporary Javanese scene. In the final chapter, "Fictions, Images, and Allegories," Sears returns to literary sources, but this time she turns to the tremendously popular wayang comic books and to innovative uses of wayang characters, narratives, and imagery in contemporary Indonesian literature. Sears has produced a work of great breadth, scope, and inclusiveness, extending from a reexamination of early Javanese history to analysis of performances and texts from the 1990s. Her research encompasses not only traditional (a term problematized extensively by Sears) court and village performances but also the transformation of wayang stories and characters in comic books and novels; political cooptations of wayang's characters, performances, and venues; and religious, ethical, and aesthetic interpretations. One should note that, although the book is quite recent, much has changed since its publication. The most dramatic change came with the overthrow of Indonesia's former ruler, Suharto, when the strict censorship practices of his regime ceased; more general and gentle change continues through rapid innovations of performers. While this book lacks the ethnographic depth and focus of earlier books on wayang, Sears more than compensates for this with the integration of ample historical analysis, a more contemporary critical awareness, and a more comprehensive representation of the genre. By stressing the political implications of wayang and charting the involvement of Dutch colonial administrators, Javanese nationalists, and Indonesian politicians in wayang, Sears does a great service. She not only adds to the understanding of wayang as a theatrical form but also gives a strong sense of the shifting meanings and uses of this form through time and from place to place.
