On the Writing of Indonesian History

Justus M. van der Kroef

One of the significant consequences of the nationalist revolutions in Africa, the Near East and Asia in our time is the desire to circumscribe and give substance to so-called national cultures, the heritage of autochthonous ways and institutions that antedate the colonial era. With the gaining of national freedom has come a new emphasis on the ethos of the new citizenry, and an attempt to see the development of the nation from a vantage point different from that occupied by the colonial administrator. Nationhood is believed to require community of experience, a sharing of values and desired modes of behavior. Thus new nations need to rewrite their history. According to a recent news dispatch from Djokjakarta, in the province of Central Java:

>Indonesia is about to take up the problem which faces every newly-freed nation sooner or later—the correction, completion and shift of emphasis which must be made in the history books of the country in order to eliminate the “colonial historian’s” presentation and restore the proper emphasis on the indigenous culture, tradition and history. ‘An important seminar on the history of Indonesia in order to bring that history out of the “dark period” that lasted some three centuries is to be undertaken in Djokjakarta in December of this year. What is sought, it was said, is a true history of Indonesia.[^1]

The reinterpretation of history by nationalist and other political movements is of course, a common phenomenon, part of that myth-making process inherent in the indoctrination of public opinion that is the objective of any ideology? Ironically, rewriting Indonesian history so as to “restore the proper emphasis on indigenous culture, tradition and history” has been going on for nearly three decades now, and those principally concerned with it have been “colonial historians,” either Dutch or of Dutch origin. In contrast, the one or two Indonesian historiographers of any note appear to cling to points of view that have been discarded by some modern colonial historians as dated and outmoded, and their persistence in these views seems to be dictated by political rather than by objective historiographical principles. In the following pages it may be useful to sketch briefly some of these modern trends in Indonesian historiography.

‘Three converging trends of new historical research have revolutionized our conceptions of the development of Indonesia: (1) the new view of the autochthonous strength of Indonesian cultures and. societies in the face of successive cultural influences from abroad, as expounded by J. C. van Leur; (2) the often startlingly novel interpretations of pre-colonial old Javanese history, associated with the name of C.C. Berg; and (3) the new legal historical interpretation of the Dutch colonial state authority in its dealings with various Indonesian principalities, advanced by G.J. Resink[^3] The net effect of these new trends has been to assign greater importance to the enduring antonomy and especially to the variety of Indonesian power structures and to minimize the tendency to see strong political-administrative influences (e.g. the colonial administration, but also such old Indonesian empires as Madjapahit) or acculturating forces (e.g., Hinduism, Islam, or Western secularism) of an over-arching, unifying and centripetal nature at work in the course of Indonesian historical development.

The work of J. C. van Leur, a historian and Dutch colonial civil servant whose untimely death during the battle of the Java Sea in World War II cut off a career of solid accomplishment and great promise, may be properly considered as the starting point of the new orientation.[^4] The essence of van Leur’s criticism of colonial Indonesian historiography before him has been best expressed in his often quoted remark that colonial historians, who (prior to the coming of the Westerners to Indonesia) had had an eye for the internal developments of Indonesian states, suddenly with the appearance of the Westerners in Asia completely altered their range of vision, “turning about their point of view one hundred eighty degrees, viewing the Indies from then on from the ship’s deck, from across the wall of forts or from the high gallery of the trading post.[^5] This new point of view had the effect of treating internal Indonesian developments as a mere appendix of Dutch national history, and, what was worse, of completely overlooking the dynamics of socio-political change and growth within the Indonesian states themselves. The net consequence, van Leur suggested, has been a colossal distortion: the Westerners, in particular the Dutch and their East India Company, are viewed as different (and, for the Asian world, unusual) phenomena, as technical and organizational entities with which the Oriental world of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries had no kinship. But this view is far from the truth, as van Leur points out: “Again and again we encounter Asian historical traits standing beside European as of equal value in the process of contact between East and West.”[^6] The commercial-organizational structure of the Dutch East India Company, far from being an innovation of daring proportions, was in fact based on age-old economic-structural procedures (eg. commenda, bottomry, and limited liability) with which both East and West had long been familiar.[^7] Militarily, the Dutch and Portuguese in Indonesia had a certain superiority, but even this advantage should not be exaggerated: when the Portuguese conquered the Malayan harbor principality of Malacca in 1511, no less than 2,000 bronze cannon belonging to the enemy fell into their hands. In navigation van Leur notes a similar equality of achievement between East and West: when in 1498 the ruler of Melinde provided Vasco da Gama, the great Portuguese seafarer, with a Muslim Gujarati to act as pilot on da Gama’s journey to Calicut, the pilot “did not show any astonishment” when provided with da Gama’s astronomical instruments, including wood and metal astrolabes.[^8] Above all, the social and political aspects of the economic process bear striking resemblances to one another: the contours of peasant civilization, of aristocratic power and culture, of domestic and international trade, are in the main identical. There is simply no evidence, according to van Leur, for an absolute supremacy of West over East in these initial centuries of their contact.

Van Leur's contribution lies not so much in discovery or utilization of new sources, but rather in fitting them into a new theoretical framework. The bases of his methodology are some of the sociological and historical formulations of Max Weber, and it is precisely these Weberian “categories” (particularly those that appear in the great German sociologist's Sociology of Religion) that enabled van Leur to see the relationship between West and East in a new light.[^9] What van Leur in essence did was to use such Weberian concepts as “city” or “guild,” “priesthood” or “trade” in a cross-cultural sense, ie, discover in what ways these concepts bore resemblances to one another when fully clothed in their relevant historical and sociological details.[^10] From this van Leur postulated a new institutional hypothesis of historical equality:

> The illustrative nature of all historical life demands the construction of a comprehensive series of historical categories. The same sort of interest and the same categorical relationships need to hold for the Hindu-Javanese court of the Nagarakertagama as for the world of Villehardouin, the same for Abul Fazl's Institutes of Akbar as for Commines, for the scenes in The Thousand and One Nights as for those in Bocaccio and Chaucer, for the Ukiyoye masters' portrayals of social life as for those of the Dutch Haarlem and Amsterdam schools.[^11]

He therefore holds that the application of Western historical categories (e.g. “the Middle Ages”), or even of Dutch national historical categories (e.g. the eighteenth century as a “century of decline”), to their Oriental setting in general and to the Indonesian development in particular is improper and a falsification of the actual, internal dynamics of historic development and of the socio-economic process. To compare East and West requires a new set of measurements which, for van Leur, were essentially developed by Weber and his school.

Another important facet of van Leur’s work, and one that is in accord with his general emphasis on the quality and strength of autochthonous Indonesian cultural institutions, is his new approach to the processes of acculturation in the Indonesian world, particularly the impact of Hindu-Indian and Muslim influences. Here too, van Leur has opened up new vistas which must be congenial to the Indonesian national historian. Prior to van Leur students of ancient Indonesian history were apt to place an inordinate stress on the influence of Hindu-Indian civilization on the peasant and maritime kingdoms of Southeast Asia.[^12] Culturally, at any rate, Southeast Asia (Indonesia included) was at this time part of “Greater India” (to use the terminology of the British scholar, Quaritch-Wales),}* a region that derived many of its political forms and institutions, its aesthetics, its cosmology, much of its religion, its methods of warfare and many other cultural characteristics from the great hearth of Hindu civilization on the Indian sub-continent, By emphasizing the fact that the Hindu acculturation process in Indonesia was essentially the work of Brahmin clerics at the scattered courts of Indonesian potentates; that peasant culture in Indonesia, and in particular in Java, must have shared in these Brahmin contributions only to a minimal extent; and

 

20 Van Leur, Eenige Beschouwingen, op. cit, pp. 8-52.

4 Bid. p. 29. 22 For an analysis of these older views see J. M. van der Kroef, “The Hinduization of

Indonesia Reconsidered,” Far Eastern Quarterly, November, 1952, pp. 17-30, and Wertheim,

“Barly Asian Trade,” op. cit. 18H. G. Quaritch-Wales, The Making of Greater India. A Study in South-East Asian Culture

Change (London, 1951). 355 Pacific Affairs

that what was carried to Indonesia by essentially untutored Hindu peddlers and traders could hardly have enriched Indonesian life with the complex and highly sophisticated features of Hindu cosmology that came in time to blend itself with Indonesian tradition, van Leur rendered an important contribution. He makes the same reservations with respect to the impact of Islam on the Indonesian world. The Muslim faith too was carried to the islands through the channels of trade and the idea that these traders, probably of the itinerant peddler variety, would have been the disseminators of an “advanced” civilization in the cosmopolitan bustling Indonesian harbor principalities with their own aristocracies, seems implausible, Rather the accultural process should be viewed to a large extent as political in origin, motivated by the diplomatic interests and power politics of indigenous Indonesian rulers and aristocracy, both in their relationships to cach other and in their countervailing policies with respect to foreign cultural and political influences (eg. the Hindu traditions earlier, Christianity at a later date) in their world

In assessing van Leur’s work one is impressed by the freshness of his hypotheses and the monumental scholarship that sustains them. One also cannot help wondering if the picture he presents is not somewhat overdrawn. There can be little question that through the first centuries of contact between Westerners and Indonesians (the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries) the Indonesian societies and the various political power structures that they supported retained their own dynamics of development, their own cultural forms and style of civilization. But when van Leur asserts (and one of his principal sympathizers, Professor W. F. Wertheim of Amsterdam, seems to agree) that in this early period, and even in the eighteenth century, there is no “antithesis West-East,” that there is no “superior West, no East that is isolating itself and no longer ascends,” then the historic facts are rather distorted.® Is there, by the middle of the eighteenth century, for example, any

14an Leur, Eenige Beschouwingen, op. cit, pp. 134-139, 180.

15 Yan Leur, “Eenige Aantekeningen betreffende de mogelijkheid der 18e eeuw als categorie in de Indische geschiedschrijving,” Tijdschrift voor Indische-Taal-Land en Volkenkunde, vol. 80 (1940), p. 567. See also Indonesian Trade and Society, op. cit, p. 289. Although in an earlier essay (Cf. Herrijzend Azië. Opstellen over de Oosterse Samenleving, Arnhem, 1050, pp. 27-28) Wertheim still posited the possibility that van Leur's conception (of Western influcence in the East before 1800 being of relatively small significance) might be open to question, in one of his principal later publications (Indonesian Society in Transition. A Study of Social Change, The Hague and Bandung, W. van Hoeve, 1956; New York, Institute of Pacific Relations) Wertheim appears to accept van Leur’s theories with few if any reservations. Thus in the latter work Wertheim seems to stress the fact that prior to 1800 the Westerners tended to adapt themselves to their Asian environment, and that “It was only after 1800 that Western impact made itself generally felt in Asia” (p. 39); and again, “Indonesian culture developed during the seventeenth and cighteenth century largely unaffected by the presence of the Dutch tradesmen . . . European superiority made itself clearly felt after 1800 in the archipelago as in

356

 On the Writing of Indonesian History

serious question of Western (Dutch) hegemony over the spice-producing Moluccan islands, any doubt of the suzerainty of the Dutch East India Company over the principalities of South Sulawesi (e.g. Makassar and Bone), any dispute over the ever encroaching power of the Dutch in the once great Central and East Javanese kingdoms, and over their ultimate wholesale dismemberment? And, in the aggregate, is there any real controversy over the fact that, far from presenting the spectacle of a more or less co-equal West and East, eighteenth century Indonesia rather shows us a picture of Western commercial and political authority casting its lengthening shadow over the entire Indonesian world, regulating and stifling its trade, forcing it into isolation, establishing forts and trading posts, exacting tribute, defeating insurgents and binding its political and economic dynamics ever closer to Western policies? Even in areas such as the island of Sumatra, where the Dutch East India Company did not have the slightest intention of establishing direct control over the whole region, the power of the Dutch was hardly subject to question: the petty states on the island were permitted to exist, it is true, but “if necessary” the Company kept these principalities “certainly in balance.”?° Those who, with van Leur, doubt the presence of a “superior West” in Java at any rate as early as the seventeenth century may, for example, be referred to the treaties between the Dutch East India Company and Amangkurat J, ruler of the Javanese Empire of Mataram (1646-1677), in which the latter was not only prohibited from making direct commercial contacts with other important parts of Indonesia without express Company permission, but in which he allowed the Company to construct through his whole country Company trading quarters and fortifications." In consequence of Company supremacy Mataram crumbles and culturally turns inward, because it becomes more and more isolated; indeed, the whole of “Javanese culture since the seventeenth century turns itself away from the world outside.”18

Kristoff Glamann in his exhaustive analysis of the structure of the trade carried on by the Dutch East India Company in the East points out that the Company was but one of many commercial organizations doing business in the richly variegated Asian economic world, and that the picture of an alldominating Company, “a nearly historyless, ever-green pagoda tree, whose

 

other parts of Asia” (pp. 282-283). In fairness the present writer hastens to add that he himself, in earlier publications, tended to the same uncritical acceptance of van Leur’s “East-West confrontation” theory.

29H, J. de Graaf, Geschiedenis van Indonesië (The Hague, Bandung, 1949), p. 299.

¥ Pieter van Dam, Beschryvinge oan de Oost Indische Compagnie, Tweede Boek, Deel III (FW. Stapel, ed., The Hague, 1939), pp. 391-392.

28D, H. Burger, “Structuurveranderingen in de Javaanse Samenleving,” Indonesié, vol. 3 (1949), p. 12.

357 Pacific Affairs

golden fruits the Court of Directors had a monopoly of shaking into its turban” is in error on many counts. But one need not be an adherent of the economic interpretation of history to understand that a Western commercial organization like the Company, which toward the close of the 17th century “achieved a control of the trade in spices to such a degree that in Europe as well as in Asia it could fix the prices completely, first the prices of cloves, then the prices of nutmeg,” and which was able to effect “no less than a commercial revolution in the Inter-Asiatic trade” by ousting with its own Javaproduced sugar the Bengali sugar which had previously had a market in Northwestern India, in fact exerted from time to time a major influence, even a preponderance, in the society and economy of parts of the Asian world.” This is something to which van Leur and his adherents give quite inadequate attention.

Van Leur’s preoccupation with restoring the autochthonous Indonesian element to its position of primary importance in historical development leads him to contradictions, On the one hand he observes that “various manifestations of foreign civilization” and “various world religions” have in succession exerted influence on the Indonesian scene. However, “fundamental changes” in “any part” of the Indonesian social and political order were not brought about by these changes: “the polish of the world religions and foreign cultural features is a thin and flaking glaze,” underneath the old indigenous cultures essentially persist.2° ‘This was his view in his doctoral dissertation of 1934. But in 1937, in an essay entitled “Some Notes on the Study of the History of the Indies” he declares: “Indonesian history is an international history. Both ethnological and documentary studies show it to be dominated by the coming of peoples and ideologies from elsewhere—ancient Indonesian immigration, Hinduism, Islam, Chinese cultural influences, European overseas voyages. . . .”*! “Dominated”—no more, no less, Indonesians before the coming of the Hindus had their sedentary peasant civilization, possibly the beginnings of feudal appanage; they had their early trading centers and their maritime achievements, their agricultural implements and their religious beliefs. But the history of Indonesia is, in fact, largely a history of invasions from many different cultures, leading to complex and unique syntheses. Is the whole of Hindu cosmology, of Sivaism and Buddhism, the Borobudur and the code of the Javanese priaji (noble), Islam and Western secularism, nationalism and Liberalism only “a thin and flaking glaze”? Is it correct to see the undoubted Hindu mythological elements in Javanese folk mythology,

19 Kristoff Glamann, Dutch-Asiatic Trade 1620-1740 (Copenhagen, The Hague, 1958), pp. 108-109, 152, 265 and passim. Ttalics supplied.

20 Van Leur, Eenige Beschouwingen, op. cit. p. 120.

2 Indonesian Trade and Society, op. cit. p. 155. Italics supplied.

358 On the Writing of Indonesian History

in the religion of the Dayaks and even of the Bataks as a mere “polish,” and is it historically proper to ignore the immediate legitimization by royal Javanese myth-makers in the seventeenth century of Dutch ascendancy over the indigenous power structures? And what of the influence of Islam, admittedly so uneven in intensity: is the evidence of its widening influence in Indonesian folk and customary law a factor of little account in the total legal-cultural framework of Indonesian peasant socictics??? And finally is the accelerating pressure of Western cultural influence, also through the channels of Christianization, with all its deep social churnings and value revolutions no evidence of “fundamental change” in “any part” of the Indonesian socio-political order?

It is difficult to suppress the feeling that van Leur may on occasion have been carried away by the sweep of his own, frequently tortuous, rhetoric and by the novelty of his application of the Weberian categories. Even so there is little reason to deny the importance of his achievement. As he correctly remarked in a letter, written while he was still a student, all important scholars of Old Indonesian history were principally philologists and not historians, above all not “economic-historical scholars.”** That a new interdisciplinary social scientific approach has been making headway in the study of Indonesian history is in no small measure the result of van Leur's work.

Confronted with the voluminous publications of C. C. Berg (university professor in Leyden), the reader’s reaction is often a mixture of irritation and admiration. For here is a scholar who projects hypotheses and corrections of these hypotheses faster than his fellow workers have time to analyze them; who, in the opinion of his critics, employs methodology as a bed of Procrustes, chopping the facts here, stretching them there; yet Berg's concepts

 

 

22 This is hardly the place to raise once again the relationship between adat and Islam in Indonesia and its numerous implications. Perhaps the chief error in van Leur's emphasis on the strength of the autochthonous Indonesian folk cultures in conjunction with his relative devaluation of Islam and other foreign influences is that no room is left for the accelerating character of such foreign influences in Indonesian society. This seems particularly true for Islam: G. W. J. Drewes, “Indonesia: Mysticism and Activism”, p. 286 in G. E. von Gruenebaum, , Unity and Variety in Muslim Civilisation (Chicago, 1955) justly notes that “the Islamization of Indonesia is still in progress”. Certainly in the context of the Indonesian’s new found sense of nationality the influence of Islam can hardly be considered as a mere veneer. Moreover the admittedly weak organizational structure of Islam in Indonesia, part and parcel of the eclecticism that surrounds its acceptance, is nowadays felt to be a shortcoming by those concerned (C. A, O. van Nieuwenhijze, Aspects of Islam in Post-Colonial Indonesia. Five Essays (The Hague and Bandung, 1958; New York, Institute of Pacific Relations, p. 80), and as it gives way to new organizational weapons provides Indonesia with an important cultural dynamic.

29 “Afchcid van Europa. Fragmenten uit Brieven van J. C. van Leur,” De Nieuwe Stem, vol. 11 (1956), no. 7-8, p. 426.

28P, D. K. Bosch, “C. C. Berg and Ancient Javanese History,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-Land-en

359

 

 Pacific Affairs

are immensely stimulating, and no other Old Javanese historian has recently brought such provocative interpretations of the substance of this history, embodied primarily in “a small number of books about rulers and rulers’ affairs.”?5

The essence of Berg’s historiographic contribution lies in his new approach to the sources of Old Javanese history. For Berg a people’s historiography needs to be viewed as “one of the elements of its culture pattern, which neither structurally, nor from an evolutionary and dynamic point of view can be separated from other elements”? Berg notes that before him no student had seen the Old Javanese historiography in the context of its time, and that from his own masters even he learned at first to view Javanese culture as static and as a virtually isolated phenomenon.” This view he had to abandon: the writing in the old texts and genealogies, the tales of dynastic origin and the chronicles of war, whether the Pararaton, the Nagarakertagama, or the Babad Tanah Djawi, should to a large extent be regarded as expressions of verbal magic, typically falling within the competence of clerics and priestly scholars at the Javanese court centers, whose task was to legitimize and “explain” by an appeal to transcendental powers the various alterations in power structure and the rise of new dynasties in Central and East Java? Within the attributed capabilities of the clerics, who wrote the chronicles that today form the main source material of Old Javanese history, lay the alteration of events: historiography for them was akin to the pronouncement of a magic formula which had the effect of changing reality, so as to bring that reality inside the traditionally comprehensible cosmology. In this process the emphasis falls upon continuity. The fall of Madjapahit is made to lead logically to the rise of the new Empire of Mataram; the coming of Islam and the emergence of Dutch power in the seventeenth century is fitted into a new cycle of myths that are really “historical” interpretations of the important changes that have been taking place in Javanese society. Thus the existence of three cultural-political elements in seventeenth century Indonesia (the Empire of Mataram, the East India Company, and Islam) seems to have led to an effort on the part of pujangga (clerics literati) of that time to “mythologize” a new cosmological triad into existence, the reincarnation of the earlier triad formed by the empires of Madjapahit, Champa and Volkenkunde vol. x12 (1956), pp. 1-24. Berg has replied to this criticism in an essay “Gedachtenwisseling over Javaanse Geschiedschrijving,” Indonesié, vol. 9 (1956), pp. 177-216.

256, C. Berg, “De Weg van Oud—Naar Nieuw Mataram,” Indonesié, vol. xo (1957), P berg, "De Sadeng-Oorlog en de Mythe van Groot Majapahit" Indonesi, vol. 5 (1953) p. 417. See also J. G. de Casparis, “Twintig Jaar Studie van de Oudere Geschiedenis van Indonesië,” Orientatie (Bandung), January, 1956, no. 46, p. 641.

2 Berg, “De Zin der Tweede Babad-Tanah-Jawi,” Indonesië, vol. 8 (1955), pp. 394-395. 28 Ibid., p. 362; Berg, “Gedachtenwisseling over Javaanse Geschidedschrijving,” pp. 186-210.

 

 

 

360 On the Writing of Indonesian History

Malayu?” All this, according to Berg, gives the Old Javanese historiography its peculiar character: dates are of little import; historic personages may not have existed at all but are symbols and creative fiats necessary to facilitate the transition from one epoch to the next; and sources may have been destroyed, leaving the present-day student with bewildering contradictions and serious chronological gaps.

Not the least noteworthy consequence of Berg’s approach is his view of the empire of Madjapahit (1292-1500), frequently viewed as the “only major power” in the whole of the Indonesian archipelago before the rise of Islam, with an active sovereignty over large areas, as well as with satellites on the fringes of its domain, encompassing in effect all of the territories of the present Indonesian Republic plus Malaya? For Berg, however, there were in the fourteenth century two empires of Madjapahit—one real, the other a mythological creation—the former a fairly large and powerful state, comprising in all probability the nucleus of its territory in East and Central Java, Bali and possibly the small island of Madura, the latter a verbal-magical creation of the cleric Prapancha, who, in his lyrical eulogy Nagarakertagama, expanded Madjapahit’s boundaries “by the simple means of a complete use of his geographical knowledge.” The historic facts, says Berg, are different: Prapancha’s list of Madjapahit’s satellites in the Indonesian archipelago “has for the student of political history no value because in no respect does it obtain support from adequate facts. But as a mythological document, and also as a reflection of the knowledge of countries of those days, it has a great culturalhistoric value. .. 3!

Berg’s proofs for all these contentions display a master’s knowledge of the detail of old Javanese history, but thus far they have found little corroboration from other competent quarters. Such corroboration may in fact be impossible, given the nature of the sources that the student of this field has to work with. This then is the first trouble with Berg’s laboriously constructed hypotheses: verification is not only extremely difficult, if not impossible, but Berg in fact implies that alternative theories could be made to appear as (if not more) plausible: “After having occupied myself with such tales [ie, the old Javanese chronicles] during a quarter of a century, I realize that I am at best able to bring some order in the data, which more or less accidentally have come to my attention. Someone else, after having worked as long in the same field, would have gathered a different set of data and

29 Berg, “De Zin der Tweede Babad-Tanah-Jawi,” esp. pp. 361-367.

20 For this traditional view see N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (and. ed. Haarlem 1931) pp. 415-418, 428, and the same author's “De Hindoe Javaansche Tijd” in F. W. Stapel, ed, Geschiedenis van Nederlandsch-Indië (Amsterdam, 1938), vol. 1, pp. 278 ff.

31 Berg, “De Sadeng-Oorlog en de Mythe van Groot-Majapahit,” pp. 412-413.

 

 

361 Pacific Affairs

would have come to other conclusions.”*2 Now it is a fact that the written sources of Old Javanese history as embodied in chronicles and court descriptions are, in so far as they are extant, available to all students; in this sense the problem is not one of having different sets of data of equal value to work with, but rather of the interpretation to be given not only to the written record itself but also (and this is Berg’s particular contribution) to the reasons for writing the record in the first place. Berg has justly criticized a scholar like de Graaf for having utilized the Old Javanese chronicles in his Senapati biography® without having considered the preliminary question of “What the author of each text used intended with his work, and to what extent this intent influences its utility.”** Berg’s concept of the verbal-magic role of Old Javanese court chronology is, in view of what is known of the total structure of Javanese court culture, wholly correct, so that no adequate use of the sources in question can properly evade Berg’s initial query. But after one accepts Berg’s view of the sources, there is even less “order in the data” than before: the slogan of the new order becomes in effect “every one his own historian.” Seemingly well established facts can be made doubtful by stressing the “mythologizing” character of all data mentioned in the written record, and hypotheses can be rendered plausible on a factual evidence that would satisfy no historian elsewhere.

Such chaos Berg surely does not intend but he leaves the reader of his controversy with figures like de Graaf and Bosch with no other conclusion. In his defense of his Senapati biography, de Graaf admits that the Javanese records do allow “a certain deliberate alteration” but he hesitates to use the term “historical falsification” in this connection.** Considering the intent of the Javanese clerics-authors, pure and simple “falsification” cannot be attributed to them, but the fact remains that alteration of reality has taken place, and that the later Dutch sources which de Graaf introduces to support the historicity of the Senapati figure were, as Berg has pointed out, probably based on second-hand or mythologized information.” For Berg, Senapati as such is not an historical figure but essentially the product of clerical imagina32 Berg, “De Weg van Oud-Naar Nieuw-Mataram,” p. 405. The uncertainty of the data of Old Javanese history may not be resolved by further research. Another noted Old Javanese scholar, F. D. K. Bosch, remarked recently that “it seems especially to be the fate of this period (ie, the Old Javanese historical epoch) that the more that becomes known of it the cloudier the relationships become.” (Bijdragen tot de Téal-Land-en Volkenkunde, vol. 114, 1958, p. 319).

SEH. J. de Graaf, De Regering van Panembahan Senapati Angalaga (The Hague, 1954), published as vol. XIII of the Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde.

% Berg, “Babad en Babad-Studie,” Indonesië, vol. 10 (1957), p. 79.

38 H. J. de Graaf, “De Historische Betrouwbaarheid der Javaanse Overlevering,” Bijdragen tot de-Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde, vol. 112 (1956), p. 56.

86 Berg, “Twee Publicaties betreffende de Beschiedenis en de Geschiedschrijving van Mataram,” Indonesië, vol. 8 (2955), p. 123.

362 On the Writing of Indonesian History

tion, inspired by the need of the first rulers of the empire of Mataram to have the proper ancestry, worthy of kings. Yet, if one accepts this view (and despite de Graaf’s criticisms there is little reason not to), key events in the history of Java before the coming of the East India Company withdraw in the mists of uncertainty. This may not be any reason for rejecting Berg’s contentions, but where their formulator himself admits the inadequacy of the data and the plausibility of alternative interpretations, the layman as well as the scholar, may be permitted to suspend judgment until more evidence is available. The same must, for the time being, apply to Berg’s theory of the true size of the Empire of Madjapahit and its influence over the Indonesian islands. Berg may be right, but as Bosch has pointed out, in the Suma Oriental of the Portuguese Tome Pires, who stayed in Malacca between 1512 and 1515 and who also visited Java, we read that Java's rule extended up to the Moluccas in Eastern Indonesia and also included nearly the whole of Sumatra?" Was Pires’ assertion also based on hearsay and mythologized information? It is neither impossible nor improbable. Again the weight of evidence is insufficient to tip the scales clearly in favor of one theory.

As B. Schrieke has shown, it is precisely at the critical junctures of Old Javanese historical development that the written records have recourse to allegorical and veiled language, thus hiding the (for the Javanese) disturbing character of events behind mythological discourse.* Yet Schrieke also shows that the Javanese were realistic and well aware of the traumatic changes brought into their world by the coming of the Dutch. Early Dutch records dealing with the events that are mythologized in the Javanese narratives may therefore have a greater value than Berg seems to imply. But in this respect also the historian cannot uncritically accept the record, not least because the Dutch may, of course, have been writing what the Indonesians wanted them to know, and not the facts. One may venture to suggest that, rather than continuing in the scholastic enterprise of formulating still more hypotheses out of controversial and ambiguous written records, future inquiries into Old Javanese history should make more extensive use of the epigraphic materials available and seck increased archeological support, where that is possible. Berg’s pamalayu essay with its interpretation of the Gamunda inscription indicates the fruitful results of this type of undertaking?”

"7B, D. Bosch, “C, C. Berg and Ancient Javanese History,” pp. 14-15. See also H. J. de Graaf, “Tome Pires’ Suma Oriental en het tijdperk van godsdienst-overgang op Java,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde, vol. 108 (1952), p. 48.

88 Indonesian Sociological Studies, Selected Writings of B. Schrieke. Part Two. Ruler and Realm in Early Java (The Hague and Bandung, van Hoeve, 1957; New York, Institute of Pacific Relations), pp. 276-277, 281. 39 Berg, “Krtanagara's 'Maleise Aflaire’,” Indonesië, vol. 9 (1956), pp. 387-417. Of special significance in this connection also is the epigraphic material published by Professor J. G. de

363 Pacific Affairs

Just as Berg has been concerned with placing the history of Madjapahit in a new perspective, so the legal historian Professor G. J. Resink of the University of Indonesia in Djakarta has attempted to re-evaluate the scope and extent of the Dutch colonial empire in Indonesia. In so doing Resink sees himself as working the same vein as the one explored by van Leur and Berg, and the conclusions implicit in his labors are designed to support the picture of a self-contained and greatly varied Indonesian pattern of states and cultures which, in many cases, have come only in the last two generations to be subjected to incisive Western influences and controls.

‘The focal point of Resink’s criticisms, and the point of departure of his own theories, is the widely held contention that Indonesia existed for more than three centuries under Dutch colonial domination. Implicit in this assertion is a concept of political and administrative control, which according to Resink, presents a wholly misleading picture of the legal nature and the mechanics of Dutch colonial government. A proper interpretation must rest upon the international legal basis of this government, particularly in the relationship between the Dutch colonial authority on the one hand, and the myriad of small states and petty principalities in the Indonesian archipelago, especially beyond Java, on the other, Administrative decisions, pronouncements of jurists and colonial government advisors, as well as data on political and military practice gathered by Resink, indicate that between 1870 and 19to in Indonesia a state of affairs existed in which certain colonial authorities could speak of “independent” principalities on the island of Sumba, “of many independent states in South Celebes,” of an independent Acheh in North Sumatra, of an “alien and as a foreign country regarded” territory known as Lingga, and of “independent” Batak regions, and that they recognized the principle of “juridical nationality with international legal aspects” for such regions as Ternate, Batjan, Kutai, Riau “and all sorts of other principalities and states,” just as they recognized the international legal aspects of marriage transactions, smuggling of weapons, or of mining concessions in the territory politically designated as “the Netherlands East Indies.” To be sure, adds Resink, most of these states and regions lay within the sphere of influence of the Dutch; yet, in dealing with them, the Netherlands colonial government concluded treaties and alliances that incorporated principles of extraterritoriality and extradition of criminals, while they “regarded the Indonesians as foreigners.”

The image of an Indonesia “controlled for more than three centuries by Casparis. See for example his Prasasti Indonesia diterbitkan oleh Dinas Purbakala Republik Indonesia II. G. de Casparis, Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th Century A.D. (Bandung, 1956). 4G, J. Resink, “Veronachtzaamde Uitspraken,” vol. 8 Indonesië (1955), pp. 1-26, esp.

pin 364 On the Writing of Indonesian History

the Dutch” as popular expressions have it, is a distortion, the falseness of which Resink declared he came to understand from conversations with “Indonesian students from areas outside Java.” For the parents of these students the period just before the coming of direct Dutch authority was still a vivid memory. Combined with statements of some nineteenth century Dutch colonial administrators and jurists they led Resink to the conclusion that the idea of a “centuries-long domination over the whole of Indonesia” was in effect a “Java-centric generalization of foreign invention,”* in which actual Dutch control over Djakarta and its environs and over the Moluccas (the original basis of colonial authority) came to be extended to the whole of Indonesia in a way not unlike that employed by Prapancha who in his eulogy brought all of Indonesia under Madjapahit’s domain. The belief in age-old Dutch dominion in Indonesia cannot stand the acid test of legal analysis of that dominion; throughout the nineteenth century, and even into the first decade of the twentieth, we encounter practices, concepts and forms of the law of nations in the relationship between the Netherlands Indies authority seated in Batavia and the principalities on the islands beyond it. Indeed, Resink, following the findings of van Asbeck, shows that the very offices and titles of the members of the Dutch colonial services reflect traditional diplomatic practice." At all times Dutch control over the many island territories and political units of the Indonesian archipelago was then far less direct and far less intensive than has been commonly supposed.

The proofs for these contentions have been gathered by Resink primarily from the juridical and legal-historical field. They include such interesting data as the international legal aspect of European land-rent in the principalities of Surakarta and Djokjakarta in Central Java, in which Dutch tenants were declared in 1882 to be subject to Javanese law in matters relating to the land-rent; administrative pronouncements in the 1870’s declaring Bali and Sunda Straits to be “open sea” (ie. outside the territorial jurisdiction of the colonial government); details on the right of Indonesian states to fly their own flags on their ships in Indonesian waters; a description of the recognized “territorial waters” not only of Indonesian states in South Celebes and Bali but also of such less well known principalities as those of Riau and Djambi; further evidence on the international diplomatic status of Dutch civil servants stationed throughout Indonesia; an analysis of a government memorandum dating from 1855, in which an attempt was made to classify the various Indonesian “states and peoples” according to their degree of dependency or to the nature of their contractual agreement with the Dutch authorities and

“Ibid, p. 17. 42 Ibid., p. 5 and F. M. van Asbeck, Onderzoek naar den Juridischen Wereldbouw (Dissertation, Leyden, 1916).

365 Pacific Affairs

in which the diversity of these later forgotten international legal arrangements clearly springs into view; a description of an atlas composed by the colonial topographic service in Batavia between 1897 and 1904 in which continuous references are made to “independent territories” in Sumatra, and to lands subject to feudal investiture and to “associated” territories in Celebes, and so on.“ From these and many other similar sources Resink concludes that insofar as a “colonial era” existed for the whole of Indonesia it was a matter of only the last four or five decades, although in some parts of the Indonesian archipelago a dependent relationship with the Netherlands existed much longer. In any event the degree of self-government allotted to the various Indonesian states implies a colonial administrative arrangement based on the principles of the law of nations and states and not on a mere one-sided dominion by the West over East. Van Leur’s concept of a historic “co-equal West and East” apparently has its implications also for this legal historical argument.

But how correct is Resink’s presentation? His theories provide a stimulating and often necessary new vantage point, but they oversimplify the problem and overstate their case. For no amount of emphasis on the international legal aspect of the relationship between the Dutch administration and the Indonesian states can obscure the fact that, primarily since the 1870's, the former in its contracts with the latter consistently held to the principle that it was sovereign, in fact coerced the Indonesian principalities to recognize this sovereignty. Because of this sovereignty, as Haar justly notes, the Dutch government had an @ priori “international legal preponderance” over the Indonesian principality. 4 The contract allowed a minimum of inter4 Resink, “Onafhankelijke Vorsten, Rijken en Landen in Indonesiê tussen 1850 en 1910,"

Indonesie, vol. 9 (1956), pp. 265-296. Sce also Resink’s “Een Cadens van Colijn,” Indonesie, vol. to (1957), pp. 246-258.

#8). C, C. Har, De Zeljsbestuurpolitek ten Opsichte van de Korte Verklaringlandschappen in Nederlandsch-Indié (Utrecht, 1939), p. 10. As carly as the middle of the nineteenth century this “legal preponderance” is implicitly present in the relationship between the Dutch colonial authority and the various Indonesian principalities. In the 1855 “Instruction” of the Dutch government to the Governor-General of the Netherlands East Indies, for example, reference is made (article 42) to “rulers and peoples”, who “wholly or in part have been left the right of self government,” and who can be regarded more as “contractual allies than as true subjects,” but it will not do to see in this clause a relationship between equals grounded on the principles of the law of nations. For the remainder of the “Instruction” indicates the sense of dominance of the colonial authority over all of the Netherlands Indies. For example, article 39 prohibits the Governor General to cede to others any portion “of the territory of the Netherlands Indies. In his policy toward the “autonomous” rulers the Governor-General is enjoined to see to it that these rulers have the welfare of their people at heart, that the slavetrade and piracy are combatted, that industry and commerce are protected, and so on. To that end an inspector is to be sent regularly to these autonomous areas to ascertain that these policy principles are complied with. Moreover, while article 46 prohibits the expansion of Dutch authority because of the weakness of the rulers, so long as the rulers comply faithfully with “existing agreements,” article 44 instructs the Governor General that in his relationship with autonomous

366

 On the Writing of Indonesian History

ference in the domestic affairs of the Indonesian state, to be sure, but at any time the Dutch government could (and did) intervene if it deemed this necessary. To magnify a certain degree of contractually sanctioned domestic autonomy into a nearly co-equal relationship between the Dutch and the Indonesian states on the basis of the law of nations is to give a distorted picture of the real relationship. Students before Resink have been aware that the nature of the contracts concluded between the Dutch and the Indonesian states (and is there any question that the entire latter half of the 19th century is marked by the virtually steady imposition of these contracts?) was somewhat ambiguous:

‘The relationship: Government (i.e. Dutch)—autonomous state (i.e. Indonesian state), is based, as the government argued, on the supremacy of Dutch authority, which allowed the Sovereign (i.e. Dutch) to intervene unilaterally if necessary. This was then a concept of power, which in an agreement of bilateral character, could not give as such any certainty to the object to which it was applied. Consequently it was therefore difficult to speak of a “contract,” because the bilateral legal basis was lacking in the agreement, also because the party that submitted itself to it could not appeal to an authority outside the agreement45

‘The Dutch government admittedly had concluded agreements with Indonesian states on the basis of the law of nations, but this basis was modified by the explicit recognition of Dutch sovereignty by both parties, and by the Dutch government's authority to intervene in the domestic affairs of the Indonesian state. Moreover, indirectly, the territory of the states belonged to the territory of the Netherlands East Indies and indirectly the subjects of these states were subjects of the Dutch Crown.!º Regardless of what may have been the view of Indonesian potentates, governments outside the Netherlands East Indies did not seriously contest the sovereign power of the

 

rulers “the recognition of Netherlands sovereignty” should be advanced “insofar as this has not as yet or has not sufficiently” taken place (italics supplied). For the text of the 1855 “Instruction” see J. Kiers, De Bevelen des Konings. De Verhouding van Koning, Minister en Landooogd Historisch Verklaard (Utrecht, 1038), pp. 210-222. In these middle years of the nineteenth century fear of British remonstrances as well as consideration of possible repercussions from the Dutch States-General may have induced caution in the application of these principles of the “Instruction”, and hence produced what one student (J. M. Somer, De Korte Verklaring, Dissertation, Utrecht, Breda, 1934, p. 137) has called “the underhanded form of interference in native affairs which between 1854 and 1870 was regarded as ideal.” Still there can be little question that regardless of the written legal sanction in the course of years since 1855 the relationship of the Dutch colonial government toward the “contractual allies” gradually becomes one of “a superior toward a dependent” (G. W. Fris, De Toepasselijkheid van Algemeene Verordeningen op de Zelfbestuursonderhoorigen in de Buitengewesten, Dissertation, Leyden, 940, p. 17). Again, to see all this with Resink (cf. his “Eeuwen Volkenrecht in Indonesiê, vol. 10, 1957, pp. 441-471) as an aspect of the application of the principles of the law of nations in Indonesia strikes one as somewhat incongruous.

48 Haar, p. 18.

400, Nagtegaal, De Voormalige Zelfbesturende en Gouvernementslandsehappen in ZuidOost Borneo (Utrecht, 1939), p. 36. 367

 Pacific Affairs

Dutch over their Indonesian possessions; indeed, they held the Dutch responsible for what occurred in Indonesian waters. In the Anglo-Dutch treaty of 1824, which played such an important role in delimiting the boundaries of the Netherlands East Indies, “the British promised not to interfere further with Sumatra or any of the other islands of the arichipelago.”47 Achin, in North Sumatra, was to be confirmed in its independence, but the Dutch were to be responsible for the safety of shipping around Achin. The piracy of Indonesian states in Indonesian waters, or the plundering and maltreatment of foreign shipwrecked sailors on the shores of Indonesian principalities, might be exercises of the sovereign rights of these Indonesian rulers in the best tradition of the law of nations, but the fact was that “the Netherlands was held responsible abroad for all these malversations”4® Whatever the speculations or pronouncements of some jurists and administrators in the Netherlands Indies regarding the relationship between their government and the Indonesian states (including the “territorial waters” of these states), foreign countries assigned responsibility (and thereby sovereignty) for what happened in the Netherlands Indies to the Dutch. And it is still an acknowledged principle of international law that territorial sovereignty finds its basis also in the recognition of that sovereignty by foreign powers.

What has enabled Resink to give plausibility to his theories is the ambiguous character of Dutch colonial administration in Indonesia during most of the nineteenth century. The Dutch East India Company had often tended to look upon the Indies as its private trading ground, just as King William T (and to a lesser extent William II) of the Netherlands looked upon the Dutch possessions in Indonesia as falling under their personal control, to be used for the economic benefit of their whole realm under an essentially mercantilist aegis. The priority of the economic factor in the Holland-Indonesia relationship precluded intensive concern with all parts of the Indonesian archipelago, unless commercially desirable. Better by far to espouse the principles of indirect rule and local autonomy than incur the costs and effort of closer supervision and administration and thereby increase the burden of responsibility (also in the eyes of other countries of the world) for what was happening in Indonesia. Such a policy tended to bend with prevailing winds: when Britain in the early 1840’s contested Dutch expansionist interests in Sumatra, the Dutch complied by temporarily vacating the East Coast of Sumatra, but the principal architect of this Dutch policy (J. C. Baud) did not thereby abandon the principle that the Dutch

 

“TB. H.M. Vlekke, Nusantara. A History of the East Indian Archipelago (Cambridge, Mass,

1945), p. 264. 48 De Graaf, Geschiedenis van Indonesië, p. 432.

368 On the Writing of Indonesian History

had sovereign rights over Sumatra, with the exception of Achin*® Another instance is the matter of permitting Indonesian states to carry their own flags on their ships. Resink regards this as an indication that contemporary opinion conceived these states to be independent and therefore entitled to carry their own colors,5° whereas the fact is that the Dutch colonial government regarded an ordinance prescribing Indonesian states to bear the Dutch flag undesirable, “because the Government would thereby the sooner be held responsible for violent and arbitrary acts committed under the Dutch flag.”**

Throughout the nineteenth century, then, we have indications of a policy that sees economic profit in leaving well enough alone, but reserves the right to interfere if it becomes necessary. To see in this policy a respect for the niceties of international legal relationships is doing it more honor than it deserves. It was not until late in the nineteenth century and in the first decades of the twentieth, when the influx of private Dutch nationals to Indonesia increased so markedly, that a new social consciousness began to project a sense of “our Indies” in the minds of Dutchmen, and along with it direct control over all the territory of Indonesia became more firmly established, But even that process, known to students before Resink, did not alter as such the constitutional basis of Dutch authority in Indonesia, but rather gave it a new socio-political dimension.

On occasion Resink is less than candid with his readers. At pains to show that certain Dutch jurists in colonial Indonesia regarded some Indonesians as “foreigners,” he cites a 1906 Government Secretarial memorandum to the Resident Officer of the East Coast of Sumatra, which points out that “in those cases in which the Government institutes a civil action against an Indonesian ruler who has not surrendered his powers, the only possible position for our judges is that this ruler juridically be regarded as a foreigner.” Resink quotes this from Haar's account? but without any indication that the whole quotation, as found in Haar reads:5* “in those cases in which the Government institutes a civil action against an Indonesian ruler who has not surrendered his powers, the only possible solution for our judges is that this ruler juridically be regarded as a foreigner, in consequence of which he can, according to the cited article of the Regulation on Civil Procedure, be haled before the Netherlands-Indies judge, that is—in accord with the prescriptions of State Gazette 1876 no. 10—in the first instance before the

 

 

49A. J. M. Goedemans, Indië in de Branding. Een Diplomatiek Steckspel, 1840-1843 (Utrecht, 1953), p. 68 and passim.

50 Resink, “Onafhankelijke Vorsten, Rijken en Landen,” pp. 275-276.

51 Nagtegaal, pp. 82-83.

02 Resink, “Veronachtzaamde Uitspraken,” p. 4. Italics are Resink's,

ma Ibid., p. 24.

54 Haar, pp. 196-197.

369 Pacific Affairs

Bench of Justice”. The italicized portion of the above quotation, of course damages Resink's case.

One has the impression that Dutch ambivalence in the practice (not in the principle) of its sovereign relations with Indonesian rulers and “selfgoverning” territories, encouraged the latter in the belief that they possessed contractual bilateral relations with the Netherlands government. This seems to be the essence of Korn’s recent essay “Eastern Vision of Western Administration” which lends some support to Resink’s thesis of the international legal basis of Dutch-Indonesian relations.** We may deplore the confusion created by this practice but it is doubtful that we can question the principle of sovereignty itself, which is what Resink seems to do. Moreover Korn in his essay has convincingly demonstrated that when in the early 1840's the problem of “empty spaces” in Dutch territorial control in Indonesia presented itself, the colonial administration acted to show its decisive sovereignty in these arcas**

For any future gathering of Indonesian scholars charged with ridding their country’s historiography of “the colonial historian's presentation” the theories of van Leur, Berg and Resink (all of whom had extensive colonial service connections) are bound to have great value. No re-evaluation of Indonesian history in the light of the contribution of the “indigenous culture” can do without the new approaches developed by van Leur, just as no analysis of the “indigenous” written sources of Indonesian (particularly Javanese) history can hope to evade Berg’s “verbal magic” theory and his hypothesis of the mythological aggrandizement of Madjapahit. Resink has rendered a great contribution in depicting the colonial relationship from an international legal aspect, so as to force a closer consideration of the widely held (also in Indonesia) belief in a three-centuriesold dominion by the Dutch. The criticisms made in the preceding pages of these new historiographical approaches are certainly not intended to detract from their stimulating freshness or from the acumen of their formulators; they are raised rather as possible matters that the new writers of Indonesian history will have to consider in their synthesis of old and novel points of view.

Such a synthesis, it would seem, would not be without some contemporary political significance. Indonesia has suffered since its emergence as an independent state from centrifugal tendencies expressed in ethnic particu“5 V. E. Korn, “Oosterse Visie op Westers Bewind,” Bijdragen tor de Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde vol. 113 (1957), pp. 16-31.

26 Ibid., p. 17. Ambivalent and successively contradictory policies with respect to the nature of government control over the Indonesian areas outside Java could lead to judicial-administrative oddities well described by J. H. Logemann, “Direct Gebied met Inheemsche Rechtspraak,” Feestbundel Uitgegeven door het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen (Weltevreden, 1929), vol. 11, pp. 109-124.

370 On the Writing of Indonesian History

larism and provincial rebellions against the central Indonesian government located in Java. Some contemporary Indonesian historians of Javanese origin (eg. Mohammad Yamin) appear to subscribe to an excessively “Javacentric” approach to Indonesian history based upon the historic greatness of the empire of Madjapahit as the precursor of the modern “Indonesian unity state”? This Javacentric view not only ignores the new concepts of Javanese history advanced by Berg but has caused considerable criticism among some Indonesian intellectuals outside Java, who accuse Yamin of holding to a “functional historiography in which he makes history subordinate to the objec tives of agitation of a chauvinistic policy.”®* Historic and political “Javanism” is a major factor in the present dispute between the central government and the outlying provinces and territories of Indonesia and one must hope that the new historiographic respect for the uniqueness, autonomous strength and rich variety of the various Indonesian cultures through the ages will contribute to that stability and peaceful growth that the world’s largest island Republic so badly requires.

University of Bridgeport July 1958

87 See the interview of Yamin in Elseviers Weekblad, September 1, 1956. 58 Bujung Salch in Indonesié, vol. 9 (1956), p. 451 and Resink, “Uit het Stof van cen Beeldenstorm,” pp. 440-441

371

# Footnotes

[^1]: Antara Daily Newsbulletin, August 12, 1957, P. 3.

[^2]: Sce G. W. Locher, “Myth in a Changing World,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde, vol. 112 (1956), pp. 162-192 and J. M. van der Kroef, Indonesian Social Evolution. Some Psychological Considerations (Amsterdam, 1957), pp. 138 ff.

[^3]: G, J. Resink, “Uit het stof van een beeldenstorm,” Indonesië, vol. 9 (1956), pp. 433-448.

[^4]: W. F. Wertheim, “Early Asian Trade: An Appreciation of J. C. van Leur,” Far Eastern Quarterly, vol. 13 (1953-1954), pp- 167-173.

[^5]: J.C. van Leur in Tiidschrift voor Indische-Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde (Batavia), vol. 79 (1939), p. 590. These remarks, as well as an English translation of van Leur’s principal works, are now available in the volume Indonesian Trade and Society. Essays in Asian Social and Economic History by ]. C. van Leur (The Hague and Bandung: W. van Hoeve, 1955; New York: Institute of Pacific Relations).


[^6]: Van Leur, “On the Study of Indonesian History,” in Indonesian Trade and Society, op. cit p. 150,

[^7]: bid. pp. 221-245.

[^8]: Van Leur, Benige Beschouwingen betrefjende den Ouden Aziatischen Handel (Middelburg, 1934), p. 157.

[^9]: Max Weber, Gesammelte Aufsiitze sur Religionssoziologie (Túbingen, 1920-1921), 3. vols,